Why? Because this is Europe, where horse-trading and deal-making is the natural order of things. Because the Greek people have spoken by voting for Syriza. Because there is an acceptance that the country has suffered grievously in the past five years. But, above all, because sending Tsipras off with a flea in his ear would mean risking A deal will be done despite what appeared to be a hardening of positions in the second half of last week. The mood darkened after the European Central Bank said it would no longer accept Greek bonds as collateral for lending to Greek banks. That was seen as an aggressive act, since it means the Greek central bank will have to provide its own emergency assistance at a higher interest rate. And even that source of funding could be ended by the ECB if it thought there was no prospect of a deal between Athens and its eurozone partners.
Were this to happen, it would precipitate a financial crisis. Greece’s banks would become insolvent very quickly, leaving Tsipras with the choice of either abject surrender or exit from the euro, followed by debt default and devaluation.
It is, though, unlikely to get to this point. Indeed, there are some commentators – such as the US prizewinning economist Paul Krugman – who believe that far from being a crude act of belligerence this was actually another one of Draghi’s subtle ploys, designed to make it clear to Merkel just how close the eurozone was to losing one of its 19 members. By refusing to be provoked by the ECB move, Tsipras and his finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, pitched their response just about right.
That said, any concessions to Greece will be limited. That was clear in the two days I spent in Brussels last week talking to officials and politicians. Valdis Dombrovskis, commissioner for the euro and social dialogue, said: “We are respecting the democratic choice of the Greek people. The European commission is willing to engage with Greece. The basis of the negotiations is that all sides stick with their own commitments.”
What does this mean? It means that the commission is prepared to take a look at the terms of its agreement with Greece but only if Athens sticks pretty rigidly to its economic reform programme. That deal left the door open for “further measures and assistance” if eurozone finance felt Greece’s debt burden was unsustainable. Some officials in Brussels think that with decent levels of growth Greece can make inroads into debt that is currently 175% of its national income and bring it down to 124% of GDP by 2020 and substantially lower than 110% of GDP by 2022. This, though, is far from a universally held view. It certainly provides some wriggle room if Greece’s euro group partners are looking for a settlement.
One option would be to write off a chunk of Greece’s debt, the so-called “haircut” that Varoufakis has been talking about in his tour round European capitals. This looks highly improbable. One official in Brussels said a debt “haircut” was a red-line issue for other member states because it would involve them taking a loss. There would be no cut in the nominal value of Greek debt, he insisted.
Varoufakis and Tsipras are also unhappy about the condition that says Greece must run a primary budget surplus of 4.5% of GDP this year. This means that once interest payments are stripped out, tax receipts must exceed spending by 4.5% of national output. To put this into context, the only other eurozone country expected to have a primary budget surplus of 2% or more this year is Germany.
Athens would like its primary budget surplus target for 2015 reduced to 1% of GDP, a move that would make more money available for public spending. Again, Tsipras will get something but not nearly as much as he is hoping for. “There may be some limited scope to look at this but the emphasis is on the limited,” one source said. It will be a struggle to get agreement to reduce its primary budget surplus much below 4% of GDP.
Almost half of Greece’s debt is owed to the European Financial Stability Facility, the euro’s original crisis-fighting fund. This debt is already on generous terms, with Athens not starting repayments until the early 2020s and at a low interest rate of 1.5%. But because Greece is not currently making any repayment of EFSF debt, interest is payable on the interest. This is something else Greece’s eurozone partners will have to look at, although the savings will not be all that substantial.
Finally, there is the possibility of exploiting ultra-cheap borrowing costs to re-issue Greek debt at lower interest rates and without the step change in debt payments that will take place in 2022. When finance ministers from eurozone countries meet in Brussels later this week to discuss Greece, this “reprofiling” will be one of the options discussed. Both sides would get something out of the deal, with a discussion to be had over the division of spoils.
Reprofiling is not a million miles away from the debt swap plan that Varoufakis has been championing. Brussels has its doubts about his idea of a perpetual bond, since it sounds a bit like the debt will never be paid back. It also has reservations about swapping Greek debt for growth-linked bonds, which would be paid back only if the Greek economy expanded by an agreed amount. But, crucially, it thinks they are a basis for discussion.
There is, though, one big proviso. None of this will happen unless Tsipras shows a willingness to continue the reforms of the Greek economy. Some will be relatively easy, since they involves things Syriza wants anyway, such as establishing a special unit to ensure high net-worth individuals pay the tax they owe. Others will be more difficult, such as toughening up pension rules that allow large numbers of Greeks to take early retirement in their 50s. But if Tsipras is smart, and his first two weeks in office suggest that he is, he will see scope for a trade off. A deal is not going to be easy. But it is possible.
