The World Economic Forum has urged governments to measure minimum wages, trade union membership, investment in public services and corruption as part of an action plan for tackling rising inequality.
Ahead of the start of its annual meeting in Davos on Tuesday, the WEF published 14 measures of inclusive growth as it responded to criticism that the gathering of 2,500 business leaders, academic and policymakers has become an exercise in hand-wringing about the gap between rich and poor.
The Forum said there was a need to make the discussions about tackling inequality “less vaguely aspirational” in a policy paper that has co-incided with new research from Oxfam showing that on current trends the richest 1% of the world’s population will by next year own more wealth than the other 99%.
Between 2012 and 2014 growing inequality was identified by WEF members as the most likely threat to the global economy and the concerns have led to WEF staff drawing up ways of measuring policies that affect inclusiveness, including business ethics, social safety nets and the quality of basic infrastructure.
“Since the onset of the financial crisis, the question of how to unlock new sources of productive employment and strengthen the contribution of economic growth to progress in broad living standards has become an increasingly important concern for political and business leaders in developed and developing countries alike. These challenges have been at the top of the World Economic Forum Global Risks Report survey in recent years”, the paper said.
“But while there is widespread international consensus on the need to develop new and improved growth and development models in this respect, little in the way of concrete policy guidance has emerged. There is a growing need for analytical frameworks and evidence-based solutions suited to this purpose.”
Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the IMF, Pope Francis, Jim Kim, the president of the World Bank and Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, are among those who have stressed the need to ensure that the fruits of economic progress are shared more equally. Carney will be taking part in a panel in Davos this week titled: “A richer world but for whom”.
Rick Samans, a member of the WEF board and a former economic adviser to Bill Clinton, said: “There is almost universal agreement about the direction that countries need to go in. It has almost become a mantra. We are coming up with concrete policy guidance.”
The WEF paper says governments should assess 14 yardsticks of progress under six pillars: education and skills; employment and labour compensation; asset building and business investment; corruption and rents; fiscal transfers; and basic services and infrastructure. Using the tool would allow policy makers to have a clearer sense of how well they were exploiting “available policy space across the full spectrum of levers”.
Samans said the intitial work by the WEF covered 96 rich, middle income and low income countries, and would be refined over the next months. “We are attempting to provide a tool - a rigorous and dispassionate one”, he added.
In countries such as the UK, real incomes have been squeezed since the deep recession of 2008-09, with living standards lower than they were at the time of the 2010 election. The WEF said governments should assess whether a “rising tide lifts all boats” by looking at labour’s share of national incomes, whether pay is linked to productivity, minimum wages, trade union density, the scope of collective bargaining and labour-employer cooperation.
The WEF study said: “However one defines it, there is no policy challenge that preoccupies political leaders around the world more than that of how to expand social participation in the process and benefits of economic growth and integration. The recent financial crisis has taught no more fundamental lesson than the need to rebalance the relative emphasis placed by economists and policymakers on efficiency-enhancing measures and top-line economic performance (growth in GDP/capita), on the one hand, and institutional frameworks and incentives that strongly influence bottom-line economic performance (i.e., sustainable, broad-based progress in living standards), on the other.
“In rich and poor countries alike, it has become increasingly clear that the former is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the satisfaction of societal expectations of national economic performance.”
