Ever since, politicians have been trying to find a way of reversing the relative decline of the north. They have offered public money to persuade firms to move from London; they have relocated government functions to the regions; they have wooed inward investment; they have created regional development agencies; they have asked local authorities to compete for pots of public money; they have announced plans to improve infrastructure.
And, even though all regions are currently growing, the problem remains. Take these three quotes, one each from the Conservatives, Labour and the Liberal Democrats and see if you can tell which is which: “We need to rebalance our economy away from its over-reliance on London and the south-east”. And: “For far too long the economies of too many regions and countries of the UK have been allowed to fall behind.” Last: “Today our economy is heavily reliant on just a few industries and a few regions, particularly London and the south-east.”
Pretty hard, isn’t it? For the record, the first quote is from Nick Clegg, speaking in 2013. The second is from Gordon Brown and Patricia Hewitt launching a Treasury paper in 2001. The third is from David Cameron’s first speech as prime minister in May 2010.
So, everybody agrees that there is a problem. Everybody agrees that something needs to be done about it. But as the latest research from the Centre for Cities shows quite clearly, finding the solution has proved tricky.
The thinktank looked at trends in population, business creation, jobs and housing in more than 60 cities, over a 10-year period from 2004 to 2013, spanning years when the economy was growing strongly, when it was in deep recession, and when it was on the mend.
Its conclusion was stark. “Despite a consistent political commitment from all parties to improve the relative economic performance of places outside of the south, the gap between cities in the south and cities in the rest of the UK has increased, not diminished.”
The populations of cities over the past 10 years have increased across all of the UK, but cities in the south have grown at twice the rate of cities elsewhere: 11.3% against 5.5%. This is hardly surprising given that business growth was more rapid in the south. In 2013, there were 26.8% more businesses in southern cities than 10 years earlier, compared with a 13.7% rise in the rest of the UK.
The divide was even more pronounced when it came to jobs. For every 12 net additional jobs that were created in the south, just one was created elsewhere. Milton Keynes, London, Cambridge, Brighton and Bournemouth had the biggest percentage increases in jobs. The worst performing city or town was Gloucester, followed by Rochdale, Blackpool, Newport and Hull. In all of these the number of jobs decreased from 2004 to 2013.
This, though, understates the challenge because much of the jobs growth in cities outside the south, while the last Labour government was in power, came in the public sector, a source of employment no longer available since the spending cuts.
Cities in the south have been able to cope better with the loss of public-sector jobs because there were 12.6% more private-sector posts in 2013 than there were in 2004. In the rest of the UK there was a 1.1% decline in private-sector posts, with double-digit falls in Gloucester, Blackpool, Hull, Rochdale, Newport, Burnley and Huddersfield.
You don’t need to be a genius to work out what stronger population growth, higher rates of business creation and greater job opportunities in the southern cities add up to: pressure on housing. In 2004, the average house in a city in the south was nine times average earnings. By 2014 that had become 14 times the average wage. Elsewhere, there was no change in affordability, with the average home costing 6.7 times earnings in 2013.
So that’s the extent of the challenge. The free-market approach has failed. Prosperity has not flowed back to the regions merely due to the workings of the price mechanism. The centralised, target-driven approach has failed. Getting local authorities to compete for little pots of money chiselled out of the Treasury has failed. The north-south divide is as big as it ever was.
There are, though, some reasons to be cheerful. First, there is now broad recognition that something different is needed. Second, lessons have been learned from London, where the creation of the Greater London authority led by a directly elected mayor proved a success. Third, the fact that the Whitehall money hose has run dry has encouraged creative thinking. Fourth, the promise that further powers will be devolved to Scotland after the closely fought referendum campaign has inevitably led to those running the big northern cities demanding similar degrees of autonomy.
Finally, there has been some political accommodation. It has suited the Conservatives and the Labour-run councils in northern cities to work together: the Tories want to show that they have something to offer beyond the shires and suburbs; the councils get to run more of their own affairs.
George Osborne’s plans for a northern powerhouse and the agreement he has struck to devolve power and funding to Greater Manchester is a sign of that.
Of all these factors, the most important has been the Scottish referendum. Britain stands out among industrial nations for its centralisation of power and the control freakery exhibited by its finance ministry. The prospect of the UK breaking up forced the British state to do what it has always been most reluctant to do: to trust people at a local level to have a bigger say over how they raise and spend money.
As things stand, the financial constraints on local government in England will remain much stronger than in Scotland. This is irrational and unsustainable. As the Centre for Cities notes: “If cities across the country are to make bigger contributions to the UK economy’s future growth, then they will need more control over their tax base.”
For more than half a century, regional policy has been based on the idea that the man in Whitehall knows best. That idea has been tested to destruction.
