The United States on Wednesday night edged closer to its first interest rate rise since before the Great Recession of 2008 when the After a two-day meeting, the US central bank said it could be “patient” about the timing of policy but dropped its insistence that rates would be kept on hold for a “considerable period”.
Wall Street had been braced for the change in the Fed’s guidance following the generally upbeat news from the world’s biggest economy in recent months.
But the fall in US inflation, also announced on Wednesday, and caused by lower oil prices, has given the central bank the luxury of choosing its moment to act. Amid fears that Russia’s currency turmoil might spread to other emerging markets, the Fed’s chairman, Janet Yellen, is now likely to spend the first few months of 2015 preparing markets for its key rate to be raised from the emergency level of 0-0.25% enacted during the worst global recession since the 1930s.
The US has recovered more quickly than either the eurozone or Japan and strong job creation has pushed unemployment down to a six-year-low of 5.8%, but the Fed ruled out the possibility of an immediate rate rise.
“Based on its current assessment, the committee judges that it can be patient in beginning to normalise the stance of monetary policy,” the Fed said in a statement. Shares on Wall Street surged after the Fed said its statement was “consistent” with its previous language that it would be a considerable time before it hiked rates.
Within minutes of the Fed announcement, New York’s In a statement following a two-day gathering of the Federal Open Markets Committee, the Fed said that data since its last meeting in October suggested the economy was expanding at a moderate rate.
“Labour market conditions improved further, with solid job gains and a lower unemployment rate. On balance, a range of labour market indicators suggests that underutilisation of labour resources continues to diminish. Household spending is rising moderately and business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Inflation has continued to run below the committee’s longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices.”
Updated quarterly forecasts released by the Fed showed it expects the The projections, presented as a range that excludes the three highest and three lowest individual forecasts, foresee the economy growing between 2.6% and 3% in 2015, unchanged from September.
Policymakers at the Fed expect the unemployment rate to move down to an average of between 5.2% and 5.3% towards the end of next year, a slight improvement on previous estimates.
The Fed, however, acknowledged that headline inflation was likely to slow next year to between 1% and 1.6%, the result of the near halving of oil prices since the summer. Core inflation, which excludes volatile items such as food and energy, is projected to dip only slightly next year and reach the Fed’s target by the end of 2016.
The Fed said: “The committee sees this guidance as consistent with its previous statement that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the 0 to 0.25% target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time following the end of its asset purchase programme in October, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the committee’s 2% longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored.
“However, if incoming information indicates faster progress toward the committee’s employment and inflation objectives than the committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated.”
Paul Ashworth, chief US economist at Capital 