A look into the future: David Cameron’s nightmare has come true; the slowdown in the global economy has turned into a second major recession within a decade.
In those circumstances, there would be two massive policy challenges. The first would be how to prevent the recession turning into a global slump. The second would be how to prevent the financial system from imploding.
These are the same challenges as in 2008, but this time they would be magnified. Zero interest rates and quantitative easing have already been used extensively to support activity, which would leave policymakers with a dilemma. Should they double down on QE or come up with more radical proposals – drops of helicopter money or using QE for specified purposes, such as investment in green energy?
For now, the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of England prefer not to contemplate this dire possibility. They will deal with it if it happens, but are assuming it won’t.
More explicit plans have been drawn up for the big banks. The concern here is obvious. The bailouts last time played havoc with the public finances and the still incomplete repair job has required unpopular austerity. Governments are not flush enough to contemplate a second wave of bailouts. Even if they had the money, they know just how voters would react if there was talk of bailing out the bankers a second time.
As a result, there has been an attempt to ensure the globally systemically important banks (GSIBs) are better prepared to ride out a storm than they were last time. In 2008, Alistair Darling felt he had no alternative but to pump taxpayers money into RBS and Lloyds banking group because they were simply too big to fail.
Reforms pieced together by the global Financial Stability Board under the chairmanship of Mark Carney envisage solving the too big to fail problem by requiring banks to hold a lot more capital against potential losses. Instead of a bailout there would be a “bail in” – investors in the big banks would take the first hit if things went sour. The idea is not just to provide the GSIBs with larger capital buffers; it is also to remove the moral hazard – the sense that there is an implicit public subsidy that can be relied on, come what may. It is thought the guarantee of taxpayer support, even after the sort of crazy lending practices that were all too prevalent in the run-up to the crisis of 2008, was an incentive for banks to behave rashly.
Speaking in Singapore, Carney said: “We recognise that our success can never be absolute. Specifically, we can’t expect to insulate fully all institutions from all external shocks, however large. But we can change the system so that systemically important institutions, their shareholders and their creditors bear the cost of their own actions and the risks they take.”
This might be the case in the event that a single big institution goes pear-shaped. In the mid-1990s, for example, Barings came to grief as the result of the activities of one rogue trader, Nick Leeson. It was clearly a one-off, with no systemic implications. In those circumstances, a bail-in would work. There would be no need for the taxpayer to be involved.
But it would be a different story if it were 2008 all over again. In those circumstances, it would not just be one bank in trouble, it would be all of them. Finance ministers have to confront the same decision as the US Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, faced in September 2008 when he held the fate of Lehman Brothers in his hands: do we rescue this bank or not? No matter how big the capital buffers, no government would be prepared to take the risk.
Here’s why. The assumption is that the requirement to hold more capital will make banks more risk averse. The idea is that they will be more cautious if they have more skin in the game. This could well be true today, when memories of the last crisis are still relatively fresh, but as the late Hyman Minsky explained, stability breeds the next crisis. Investors start off being risk averse but become more and more emboldened over time. They take more risks as prices rise. They believe the only way for markets is up. They start to utter the fatal words: it’s different this time. In those circumstances, it is irrelevant whether a bank’s capital buffer is 2% or 20% of its risk-weighted assets. It won’t be enough when the crisis comes.
A second assumption is that the financial sector will accept the new arrangements in perpetuity. History suggests otherwise. Attempts will be made to water down capital requirements, and the banks will become more willing to flex their muscles as memories of the past crisis fade. Controls will be weakened just at the moment they are needed most.
The financial expert, Avinash Persaud, has identified another serious weakness in the new plans. This has to do with the way in which banks will raise the extra capital. The traditional way for a bank to hold capital is through retained earnings or financial holdings that they can turn into cash quickly. But banks have come up with a way of boosting their capital ratios without the need to hold large amounts of cash or equity. They are issuing bail-in securities, known as cocos (contingent, convertible, capital instruments) that convert into equity once a bank’s capital falls below a certain level. Cocos act like an insurance policy that can be cashed in at the appropriate moment.
The hope was that pension funds, which tend to have a long term outlook, would be the main buyers of the bail-in bonds. But so far, they have been snapped up by hedge funds, private banks and retail investors – who tend to be short-termist in their outlook and especially prone to herd-like behaviour. More and more of them are being issued to meet the demand.
You’re probably thinking what I’m thinking. Investors will pile into bail-in bonds in the way they piled in to US subprime mortgages. The bubble will eventually burst leading to a rush for the exit.
As Persaud notes in an article for the Petersen Institute for International Economics: “On such occasions these securities, which may also have encouraged excessive lending, either will inappropriately shift the burden of bank resolution on to ordinary pensioners or, if held by others, will bring forward and spread a crisis. Either way they will probably end up costing taxpayers no less and maybe more. In this regard, fool’s gold is an apt description.”
Carney believes the recent G20 summit in Brisbane marked “a watershed in ending too big to fail”. But that’s not the same as solving the problem. Before Brisbane, policy makers knew they hadn’t cracked too big to fail. After Brisbane, they mistakenly think they have.
