Children suffering abuse and exploitation would have the right to take their governments to an international human rights court under proposals announced by The former prime minister used the 25th anniversary of the UN Convention on the rights of the child to demand a new global body that would offer better protection against forced marriages, child labour and child trafficking.
Brown, the UN special envoy for global education, said arrangements for protecting the rights of children were inadequate and called for a children’s court modelled on the European Court of Human Rights.
In a letter to Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, Brown said governments were “failing in their collective responsibility to uphold the Convention on the rights of the child (CRC) and defend the fundamental human rights of children.”
The former prime minister said there needed to be tougher action to deal with the 15 million child brides every year, the 15 million child labourers not in school and the 32 million girls prevented from going to school.
In a paper co-authored with the Nobel prize winner Kailash Satyarthi and Kevin Watkins, director of the UK-based think tank, the Overseas Development Institute, Brown said no human rights treaty was more widely ratified than the CRC, but governments were required to report on their compliance on children’s rights once every five years. Even then, it added, just one in seven compliance reports were submitted on time with a third not submitted even a year later.
“Only 10 countries have ratified optional protocol on communications to allow children and their representatives to bring cases before the Committee as part of the review process. Even then the average time lag between registration and final decision in cases taken up by the Human Rights Committee is three-and-a-half years with no legal obligation on states to review and reform policies even when they are identified as being in violation of international human rights obligations.
“It is time to consider the case for the establishment of an international court for children’s rights. If we did so we would envisage an institution modelled on the European court on human rights and the inter-American court on human rights, both of which have a remit to investigate individual petitions, independently monitor performance in member states, and review areas of concern.”
Brown’s proposal identified four areas where governments should be held to legal account and possible sanction: failure to investigate and use the law to remedy hazardous child labour; failure to act to eliminate all forms of child slavery; failure to enact and enforce legislation outlawing marriage before the age of 15; and failure to prevent children being involved in armed conflict.
The paper said there was gap between the promise held out by the CRC and the current practices of the international community. It noted that 115 million children aged between 5 and 17 were involved in hazardous child labour; child slavery, at 5.5 million, was at a record high; that the trafficking of children had reached “epidemic proportions”; and that 150 million girls under 15 were forced into early marriage in “clear contravention” of the CRC and national laws.
“Our collective failure to protect children from armed conflict is another cause of concern. Recent experience in Syria and Gaza has graphically illustrated the on-going failure to protect children living in armed conflict. Watkins said the aim was to make governments take their commitments under the CRC as seriously as they took their annual health check on the economy from the International Monetary Fund. When officials from the IMF arrived in a country, he added, they had an audience with the finance minister. By contrast, reports to the CRC were compiled by middle-ranking civil servants.
“No government fears a visit from those looking at the fundamental rights of the child” he said. “There is no reputational damage.”
