Clearly, Cameron wants to avoid the fate that befell global leaders when the financial crisis broke in the summer of 2007 and policy makers were caught unawares by the ability of problems in the US sub-prime mortgage market to lead to the near-death of the world’s biggest banks.
There is, therefore, purpose in the prime minister’s message that “red lights are flashing on the dashboard of the global economy”. Nobody will able to accuse him of having been asleep at the wheel if things do go badly wrong in the coming months.
So how real are these threats?
The first problem he identifies is Europe, where he fears a third recession in the eurozone will lead to deflation. Given that the single currency area has never recovered from the financial and economic crisis of 2007-09, this is justified. There are already signs that the latest slowdown in A slowdown in emerging markets is the second risk highlighted by the prime minister. This is less problematical for the UK. Some emerging market economies – such as Brazil and Russia – have weakened, but China is still expanding at 7% a year while the worst of India’s problems seem to be behind it. What’s more, the UK exports more to the Netherlands than it does to the Bric (Brazil, Russia, India and China) countries combined. What then of the failure to complete the Doha round of trade talks, Cameron’s third worry? The fact that these negotiations have been going on for 13 years tells its own story: the lack of progress did not prevent the global economy from growing fast between 2001 and 2007 and the benefits of trade liberalisation tend to be exaggerated. There is little evidence of 1930s-style protectionism. Finally, there’s the bundle of geo-political risks but Ebola has been largely contained to three countries in west Africa (Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia) while oil prices have collapsed in recent months despite what has been going on in Syria, Iraq and the Ukraine. These could all become serious problems, but for now they are localised. Interestingly, Cameron failed to mention home-grown factors that might threaten the UK recovery, such as an over-reliance on a housing market that is now slowing and a parliament-long squeeze on living standards only just abating.
While dwelling on these subjects does not fit with the government’s narrative, they are probably more immediate threats than all those mentioned by the prime minister with the exception of Europe.
