That’s not to say none of the other factors matter. Global pandemics, all the way back to the Black Death in the 14th century, have always been economically catastrophic. The knock-on effects of America starting to jack up the cost of borrowing are uncertain, but potentially problematical. The dangers facing policymakers in China as they seek to move the economy towards lower but better balanced growth are obvious. But it is the worsening condition of the eurozone that has spooked markets in the past couple of weeks.
The problem can be broken down into a number of parts. The first problem is that recovery in Europe appears to have been aborted. A tentative recovery began in the middle of 2013, but appears to have run into the sand. Technically, the eurozone has been in and out of recession since 2008. In reality, the story of the past six years has been of a deep slump followed by half a decade of flatlining.
Until now, markets have been able to comfort themselves with the fact that the core of the eurozone – Germany – has been doing fine. Recent evidence has shown that the slow growth elsewhere in Europe, in countries such as France and Italy, is now having an effect on Germany. Exports and manufacturing output are suffering, not helped by the blow to confidence caused by the tension in Ukraine. That’s problem number two.
Until now, opposition from Berlin and the still influential Bundesbank in Frankfurt has made it impossible for the European Central Bank to fire its last big weapon: quantitative easing. The slowdown in Germany should make it easier for the ECB’s president, Mario Draghi, to begin cranking up the electronic printing presses, but are markets impressed? Not really. They are coming to the view that monetary policy – using interest rates and QE to regulate the price and quantity of money – is maxed out.
The third facet of the problem is concern that Draghi’s intervention will be too little, too late, and that Europe is condemned to years of nugatory growth.
The fact that this matters for the rest of the world is problem number four. The EU is the world’s most important market: it has more than 500 million consumers, most of them well off by global standards. The pressure from the Americans and Chinese on the Europeans at the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund in Washington was easy to understand: weak demand in the eurozone means lower growth in the rest of the world.
This leads on to the fifth and final problem: Europe could continue on its current course for years to come. It has become fashionable to talk about how Europe is on course to be the new Japan, characterised by a falling population, low growth and deflation. In fact, the comparison could be closer to home. Italy has a low birthrate, falling prices and living standards lower now than at the end of the 1990s. The prospect of Europe being the new Italy is not a cheerful one.
