The theme of this week’s annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the Everybody is getting in on the act. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, will share a platform with Christine Lagarde, the head of the IMF, and Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, next weekend to discuss how to make global capitalism more inclusive.
The World Economic Forum – the body that organises the Davos shindig – thinks it can go one better. It is angling to get the pope along for its annual meeting in January.
No question, 2014 has been the year when the need to tackle inequality has gone mainstream. Oxfam kicked it off with the report showing that 85 billionaires owned as much wealth as half the world’s population. Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the 21st Century provided some intellectual underpinning, with its thesis that a rawer, 19th-century version of capitalism was reasserting itself. It’s not hard to see why both struck a chord: a tepid global economy, high unemployment, stagnant living standards and trickle up to those at the top have created an environment of sullen unease. No political speech these days is complete without a reference to the need to ensure that a rising tide lifts all boats.
But talk is one thing, action another. How does Lagarde’s pledge to fight inequality square with the wage cuts and austerity the IMF has imposed on Greece and Portugal as part of its bailout packages? Is there not a disparity between the commitment of the World Bank president, Jim Kim, to raise the incomes of the bottom 40% of the world’s population with his organisation’s Doing Business report, an annual study that ranks countries by the progress they are making in cutting corporate taxes, keeping minimum wages at low levels and ensuring that paid holidays and sick pay are not excessive?
In one sense, the new consensus is encouraging. There is a recognition that inequality is a problem. That’s a start, but only a start, a necessary but not sufficient pre-condition for things to change. The rhetoric has to be fleshed out to make shared prosperity meaningful.
Let’s take two examples of how it could be this week in Washington. One involves the education of Syrian refugee children in Lebanon. The other is the response to the Ebola virus in west The civil war in Health systems in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea – the three countries worst affected by Ebola – simply cannot cope. It’s not hard to see why. In the UK, there are 2.7 doctors per 1,000 people. In Guinea, there are 0.1. In Sierra Leone and Liberia, there are so few doctors that the World Bank table registers both countries as 0.0. According to Justin Forsyth, director of Save the Children, Liberia had 61 doctors and 1,000 nurses before the crisis began. Sierra Leone, where there were 765 new cases of As Marcus Manuel of the Overseas Development Institute noted last week, tackling Ebola effectively requires a plan and enough money to make that plan work. Currently, there is neither.
In Liberia, the original proposal was to make up for the lack of specialised hospitals with treatment in the home, with carers given gloves and aprons, rather than full body suits, as protection. This was never going to stop the threat of infection. Nor will care in small, under-resourced four- to six-bed community centres. Already, there is evidence of people losing confidence in the healthcare they are likely to receive, leading to them failing to come forward for treatment not just for Ebola but for other preventable, yet life-threatening, diseases.
In its early stages, Ebola was seen as a localised problem, another one of the diseases that affects poor countries in Africa. Only belatedly have the risks of a global pandemic been recognised. The result is that the response was originally slow, then panicky. It remains muddled and inadequate despite the latest pledges of financial support.
How has this been allowed to happen? It is almost a decade since the Gleneagles G8 summit agreed to double aid flows to Africa and western governments preened themselves when the target was eventually met. Britain’s coalition government now spends 0.7% of national income on aid, fulfilling the pledge made by the last Labour administration. The public has a right to know why the increase in development assistance has not left health systems in west Africa better prepared for Ebola.
A number of factors are involved. In part, it was because some of the additional money was never actually delivered: some western countries were creative when it came to dressing up debt relief or places for African students at their elite universities as aid. In part, it was because the extra money was not always well spent. The UK’s Independent Commission for Aid Impact was, for example, critical of the In part, the problem lies with African governments, who have made commitments to spend a higher proportion of their budgets in pro-poor sectors such as health and education, but have often failed to do so.
Most importantly, perhaps, there has been a lack of leadership. Barack Obama has not provided it. The Europeans have been too obsessed with their own financial crisis to pay much heed to the rest of the world. The Chinese remain detached. George Osborne writes the cheques for DfID but seems to have zero interest in development.
The test is not what policy makers say about inequality, both at home and abroad; it is what they do. It is about being prepared to redistribute resources from rich to poor. It is about creating an international tax system that prevents revenues being salted away in tax havens. It is about ensuring that trade agreements are not written by multinational corporations. It is about strengthening welfare safety nets and the rights of workers. And it is about recognising that both the private and the public sector have a role.
Bear all this is mind when Washington resounds this week to calls for inequality to be tackled. There is a mountain to climb. Policy makers are still at base camp.
