Business liked what it heard from Ed Balls in his speech to Labour’s conference.
“There were no surprises and no surprises is good,” said the CBI’s director general, John Cridland. He liked the commitment to deficit reduction, and the fact that the shadow chancellor’s speech was pro-European, pro-export and pro-expanding airport capacity in the south-east of England.
There were one or two caveats. Terry Scuoler, of the EEF manufacturers’ organisation, wanted to hear more about how a But the real criticism of the speech did not come from business. The Child Poverty Action Group said it was a “bitter disappointment” that Balls had decided to uprate child benefit by 1% in each of the first two years of the next parliament. The Unite union’s general secretary, Len McCluskey, was equally unimpressed.
That, though, seemed to be the point. Labour trails behind the Conservatives on economic competence and is seen by employers’ groups as anti-business. The Balls speech did not go down a storm in the conference hall in Manchester, but was never designed to do so.
Instead, the aim was to nullify what will be one of the main attack lines of the Conservatives in next year’s general election: the danger of handing control of the economy back to the party that was in power when the economy suffered its worst recession since the second world war. Or, as the chancellor George Osborne pithily puts it: “Why hand the car keys back to those who drove it into the ditch in the first place?”
This is proving a productive approach. Support for austerity is now stronger than it was at the start of the parliament. As the economy has started to grow again over the past 18 months, Labour has lagged further and further behind on the economy.
Hence the Balls speech was light on jokes and even lighter on new spending pledges. With only eight months to go before the election, what was unusual about the address was that it contained nothing new to wow the party faithful.
When he was in iron chancellor mode, Gordon Brown used to talk about “prudence for a purpose”. Balls called his version of the same thing “fiscal responsibility in the national interest”.
This means Labour balancing the books in the next parliament. It means that Labour will run a surplus on the day-to-day current spending of government. Above all, it means that in the Labour manifesto next year there will be “no proposals for any new spending paid for by additional borrowing”.
On the face of it, that appeared to match Osborne’s plans to run an overall budget surplus in the next parliament, with any borrowing for investment more than matched by a surplus on current spending. Balls’s aides said there had been no toughening up of the stance.
How much of this stuff does the shadow chancellor actually believe? As an economist he knows there is no reason why the government should tighten its belt just because voters are tightening theirs.
Indeed, that was the point he made when attacking Osborne’s austerity programme earlier in this parliament. Borrowing for investment makes sense if the benefits outweigh the costs. But the next election will not be fought on the ground of the shadow chancellor’s choosing.
Balls believes that Labour will only get a hearing for its different set of tax and spending priorities if it looks serious about deficit reduction.
