Scotland's economy was in good shape in the runup to the independence referendum. As the third-richest region in the UK after London and the south-east of England, tens of thousands of new jobs were created in the three months ending in July.
Data from the Office for National Statistics showing that employment rose by 45,000 in But those in favour of independence believe the strength of the economy helps their argument. There are many small countries around the world that not only survive but thrive in an era of globalisation, and Scotland, they say, would be one of them. The country already has an employment rate (73.9%) higher than any country in the EU and would do even better were the economy run from Edinburgh rather than London.
Yes voters do not recognise the dystopia conjured up on Wednesday by Gordon Brown in which he said SNP policies could send Scotland down an economic trapdoor from which there would be no escape. But the former prime minister's arguments were aimed not at the already committed on both sides, but on the relatively large numbers of "don't knows" still unsure about the six key economic issues. They are:
Central to the whole debate is what currency an independent Scotland would use. Westminster politicians have argued that the lesson of the crisis in the eurozone is that monetary unions without political union are a recipe for disaster. One thing George Osborne and Ed Balls agree on is that there will be no currency union after a yes vote. The polls suggest that this has not been the game clincher the no camp expected.
Alex Salmond, Scotland's first minister, says a currency union makes sense given the large amount of trade that flows north-south across the Tweed and that politicians in London will adopt a less belligerent pose once the referendum is out of the way. Scotland, he says, is prepared to pick up its share of the UK national debt after independence but only if it gets a fair share of the assets, including the pound.
The second big issue, therefore, is what might happen if Westminster is not bluffing. In those circumstances, Salmond says Scotland could use the pound anyway, in the way that Panama uses the US dollar. But that means having no say in how the Having a central bank to stand behind the banks matters because the liabilities of the Scottish banks are 12 times as big as the annual output of the Scottish economy. To put that in perspective, in Ireland and Iceland they were eight times as big ahead of the crippling 2007-08 banking crisis.
RBS and Lloyds banking group have already made it clear they will be taking no risks. After a yes vote, whether or not there is a deal on a currency union, they have announced that they will shift their HQs to London.
In the long run, it might make sense for Scotland to be less dependent on the financial sector as a source of growth. In the short term, however, an exodus by banks, insurance companies and fund managers would leave a big hole in Scotland's budget and lead to concerns about its balance of payments.
How Scotland would deal with this potential "twin deficit" is the fourth question. Prof Ronald MacDonald, of Glasgow University, has calculated that even with oil revenues from the North sea, Scotland would have a balance of payments deficit of between 2-5% of national output (gross domestic product) and a budget deficit of 5% of GDP. Salmond and his economic team say oil will come to the rescue.
The yes campaign cites estimates from the industry body, Oil & Gas UK, showing that there are 24bn barrels of crude reserves yet to be pumped, and potentially even more once fields to the west of Scotland have been exploited.
However, the Edinburgh-based energy consultants Wood Mackenzie estimate reserves at just over 15bn barrels.
One of the factors helping the yes camp during the campaign has been anger about cuts imposed on Scotland by the coalition in London that Scotland did not vote for.
Yet austerity will not end in the event of a yes vote. Indeed, it might need to intensify because a new Scottish government would start life with a sizeable budget deficit and would need to finance its share of the national debt (around £120bn).
The question is not austerity or no austerity, but austerity imposed by Westminster or austerity imposed by Holyrood.
