A period of silence on your part would be welcome. That was Clement Attlee's put down to Harold Laski when the post-war premier thought the chairman of the Labour party was speaking out of turn in 1946. Increasingly, the financial markets would like someone to repeat that message to The latest in a series of seemingly conflicting statements emerged from the governor of the Bank of England in an interview with the Sunday Times. Just days after delivering what the City took to be a "doveish" quarterly Inflation Report, Carney told the paper that the Bank might raise interest rates before growth in earnings caught up with inflation. That prompted speculation of an earlier rise in borrowing costs than the markets had been expecting and was enough to send the pound up on the foreign exchanges.
Carney has form for this sort of thing. The previous It's possible Carney is keeping the markets guessing because the Bank itself is unclear about the real state of the economy. Threadneedle Street has been surprised both by the strength of growth and the weakness of pay over the past 12 months.
A second possibility is that Carney's hint that rates could go up even while real incomes are still being squeezed is meant to forewarn the markets that the minutes of the August meeting of the Bank's monetary policy committee, due out on Wednesday, will show at least one policy maker voting for dearer borrowing. It was clear from the Inflation Report that there is division on the MPC about the amount of spare capacity in the economy and the rate at which that slack is being used up.
That's the best gloss that can be put on the governor's latest pronouncement. It would now be a real surprise – and a blow to Carney's credibility – were the minutes to show a 9-0 vote in favour of keeping borrowing costs unchanged. Why? Because a split vote would mean that the governor was putting the markets on notice for a hawkish set of minutes. A unanimous vote would give the unfortunate impression that he is making it up as he goes along.
