It's Monday morning and time to do the weekly food shop while the supermarket is quiet. You fill your trolley and head for the checkouts to find that there are three other customers waiting in the queue for the only till that's open. There are, however, plenty of self-service checkouts available if you want to use them.
This strikes you as strange, since there appeared to be several supermarket staff trundling up and down the aisles. On closer inspection, you find that these workers are filling trolleys from the shelves.
If you have been in this position, and most of us have at one time or another, you are well on the way to understanding Britain's productivity puzzle. Productivity is one those terms that economists use all the time, but is really a way of measuring whether we are getting more efficient at doing things. If a factory doubles its output of cars using the same number of people on the assembly line that's a 100% improvement in productivity.
In the case of the supermarket, getting customers to scan their shopping is a productivity gain for the company. They need to employ fewer people for the same amount of goods passing through the checkouts. It is, though, usually a productivity loss for the customer, since they waste time performing the task less efficiently than a full-time member of staff who could have scanned their items more quickly.
The staff trundling up and down the aisles filling the trolleys are preparing the orders for customers who shop online and have their groceries delivered.
This represents a productivity loss for the supermarket, since these are customers who would once have been filling their own trolleys. Now the company has to employ more people so that its customers can spend 15 minutes on the internet rather than an hour or so in the store.
This is a productivity loss to the supermarket and a productivity gain for the customer, who in these days of cut-throat competition can expect to pay only £1 for the privilege of having food delivered straight home.
The net efficiency gain (or loss) the supermarket gets from the combination of self-service checkouts and online shopping will show up in the government's productivity figures. The net gains or losses to customers tend not to, since they figure in having more (or less) time to lie in bed in the morning reading the Guardian, to tend the garden or go to a movie.
What seems clear from the most recent official productivity data is that the supermarkets are taking a big productivity hit in order to keep their online customers happy. The real economic cost of selecting the food from the aisles, bagging it, loading it on a van and delivering it is far higher than £1 a throw and feeds straight into the company's bottom line.
The companies need to find a way of keeping those losses to a minimum. Filling somebody else's shopping order is not a skilled task. Most people can do it, including those looking to top up their pensions, young people unable to find any other jobs and those who have previously been longterm unemployed.
Here, the interests of the coalition government and the supermarkets neatly chime.
Ministers want to get people off welfare; the supermarkets want cheap labour. The total amount of food sold doesn't change that much but productivity slackens because more people are doing the same amount of work.
Ultimately, rising productivity is the key to higher living standards. When people get paid more for doing things better that's better productivity. When they get paid more for doing the same, that's inflation. In the years leading up to the great recession of 2008-09, average earnings growth of about 4.5% a year was made up of 2% inflation and 2.5% productivity growth. As a result, real living standards rose by 2.5% a year.
But since 2008, productivity has collapsed as more people have been employed to produce the same level of output. Output per worker is currently 17% below where it would have been had the pre-recession trend continued, which explains why this has been a lost decade for living standards.
That, though, is history. The real issue is when will productivity return to its old pre-slump trend? If ever. That, in turn, is related to the reason productivity has been so weak in the first place, a theme explored by the Bank of England in last week's inflation report.
One explanation is that productivity is being under-recorded. It may be that national output will be revised upwards as more data comes in. That will eat into the productivity shortfall since 2008 but cannot explain all of it.
It is also possible that the underlying upward trend in productivity is lower than it was. The decline of oil and gas production from the North Sea, for example, might have had a bearing on overall output per worker because that is a sector where a relatively small number of workers accounts for a big slice of Britain's economic activity.
A third factor identified by the Bank is that some companies kept employment levels high during the recession and its aftermath so that they could compete for what little work was available. Many estate agencies did this when the housing market was in the doldrums.
Finally, the Bank thinks companies may have been inclined to use more labour-intensive forms of production because employing staff has been cheap and investing in new efficiency-enhancing kit has become relatively more expensive.
One trend not mentioned by the Bank is that there may be a tendency over time for employment to be concentrated in sectors where productivity gains are difficult to secure or measure. Think care homes and nurseries.
Some of these structural changes in the economy predate the recession, so unless skills have atrophied or we have become thicker as a nation, there is good reason to imagine that productivity will eventually pick up. Maintaining demand at a strong level is crucial, however, since that will provide a double benefit. Firms will get more out of their workers and will be encouraged to invest in new capital.
But isn't there a risk that more people in work will lead to a wage-price spiral? Not at the moment, it appears. That's because a good number of the people who have recently been put on the payroll in your local Sainsbury or Tesco were previously inactive.
A new army of low-paid, low-skill workers is depressing the level of average earnings growth across the economy and forcing the Bank to revise down the level of unemployment consistent with stable inflation.
