France piled pressure on the With Sapin's demand came as the latest figures from Eurostat, the European Union's statistical agency, showed that problems in the single currency's Big Three economies – But financial markets saw no immediate prospect of the ECB launching its own money creation (quantitative easing) programme until next year at the earliest, amid concerns that countries such as France and The interest rate – or yield – on 10-year German bonds briefly fell below 1% for the first time as dealers anticipated a protracted period of low growth, low inflation and low interest rates. Markets already knew that Italian output had contracted by 0.2% in the second quarter but were surprised by a similar-sized fall in Germany, which was hurt by a more challenging climate for its key export sector.
France made it clear it blamed foot-dragging on the part of the ECB for the failure of the eurozone's second-biggest economy as it reduced its growth forecast for 2014 from 1% to 0.5% and ditched the 1.7% forecast for 2015, saying it would not expand by much more than 1%.
Francois Hollande's government had negotiated special dispensation from Brussels to run a budget deficit of 3.8% of GDP this year rather than 3%, but Sapin said it was the ECB's fault that this would not be hit.
"We must adapt the pace of deficit reduction to the exceptional situation ... of growth that is too weak everywhere in Europe and the exceptional situation of inflation that is too weak across Europe," Sapin told Nancy Curtin, chief investment officer at Close Brothers Asset Management, said pressure was mounting on "Draghi is involved in a game of brinkmanship. It is not fiscal austerity but evidence of structural reform that he is looking for before he considers sanctioning European style QE, especially from Italy and France.
"However, structural reforms do not happen overnight and, as the case for QE strengthens, any delay will have a disproportionate impact on the pace of recovery in the rest of Europe."
Some of the smaller economies on the periphery of the eurozone – including Spain and Portugal – recorded solid growth in the second quarter, and the Netherlands bounced back from a weak first quarter to expand by 0.5%. But Germany, France and Italy between them account for two-thirds of eurozone GDP and dragged down the overall growth figure. The annual rate of growth fell from 0.9% in the first quarter to 0.7% in the second quarter.
Markets had been expecting growth in the second quarter to be 0.1% or 0.2%, but said the fresh setback to the eurozone raised the prospect of a triple-dip recession. The eurozone suffered a sharp contraction in 2008-09 and then had a second, milder downturn from which it only finally emerged during 2013.
The figures released by Eurostat covered a period before the recent deterioration in ties between the European Union and Russia over the Ukraine, which has led to tit-for-tat sanctions and falling business confidence in Germany.
Chris Williamson, economist at Markit, said: "A stalling of economic growth in the second quarter raises concerns that the euro area is sliding back into a triple-dip recession. Many, including the European Central Bank, point to survey data suggesting such fears are overplayed, and that growth will revive as previously announced stimulus takes effect. But the weakness of economic growth will certainly fuel louder calls for the ECB to do more to reinvigorate growth across the single currency area."
Peter Vanden Houte, economist at ING, said: "Today's figures show that the upturn remains too weak to withstand external shocks, meaning that GDP growth will probably remain stuck in stop-and-go mode. It now looks very likely that GDP growth for the whole of 2014 will remain below 1.0%."
