It all kicks off not long after the start of the rugby league game between Rochdale Hornets and Leigh Centurions. There is a melee involving all 26 players after a Leigh player holds down an opponent and thumps him in the face with a straight right. The culprit gets a yellow card and 10 minutes in the sin bin rather than a red, and the incident seems to knock the stuffing out of the Hornets, who go down to a 72-22 defeat to a team that is fitter, faster and on better money.
It is the same story off the pitch. The battle for economic survival is tough and Rochdale is up against rivals who are fit, fast and have more cash to splash.
Sitting in the shadows of the Pennines, Rochdale was built on cotton in the 19th century but suffered long-term decline as the mills closed and the manufacturing base shrivelled.
In recent years, it has been hit by recession, public spending cuts and scandal. The Rochdale Pioneers paved the way for the co-operative movement and the town was the birthplace of the singer Gracie Fields, but today it is perhaps better known as the place where the MP Cyril Smith preyed on boys.
Despite a splendid Victorian gothic town hall, the centre of Rochdale is shabby. Recovery from the recession of 2008-09 is happening much more slowly than in nearby Manchester.
There is a limited range of shops, either because of a lack of spending power or because money is being spent elsewhere. Like many other towns and cities, it is chasing inward investment and tourists, and seeking to prevent a brain drain of the skilled and ambitious.
It is a tall order, especially against a backdrop of continuing austerity. But Rochdale has things going for it. It has the M62 on its doorstep and a new tram link to central Manchester. Its Kingsway business park is an ideal location for distribution centres, but there are also hi-tech businesses.
Mark Lineker, at TBA Electro Conductive Products, says he is running the only company in the world that has so far found a commercial use for the new wonder material graphene.
Source Bioscience is a specialist laboratory storage company which houses drugs for pharma companies in temperature and humidity controlled environments. It also makes the fridges used for the storage process and is an example of a company where the distinction between manufacturing and service sector has become blurred. "Business is strong", the company's Simon Palmer says.
Even in the toughest environments, there are always examples of innovation and excellence. The problem is not that Rochdale lacks good companies, but that it lacks enough of them. It has good jobs, but there are too many of the low skill, low wage variety. The regeneration challenge, in Rochdale as in many other northern towns, is to tilt the balance, to develop a critical mass that will reverse decades of relative decline.
That requires a different model from that tried by the last Labour government, which recycled tax receipts from the south to fund an expansion of the public sector in the north. The money helped to improve the town's schools and build a highly regarded new sixth form college, but Simon Danczuk, the town's Labour MP, says the days of government largesse are over.
"The public sector has been dramatically reduced," he says. "Getting Rochdale going in the right direction won't be done through the public sector. It will be done by the private sector, so we have to encourage entrepreneurialism."
Even so, it's hard to envisage a successful regeneration strategy that does not involve the public sector. One option, quite hard to swallow for a town proud of its independent history, is to see its future as part of a vibrant, successful extended conurbation. Manchester is doing well, and has the potential to drag towns like Rochdale along with it. Further improvements in the transport infrastructure, such as high speed rail three, the plan announced by George Osborne to link towns in the north, would accelerate this process.
The council is trying to do its part. It is making improvements to the town centre and is marketing Rochdale as a good place to do business and to live. Richard Farnell, the leader of the council, says more could be done to exploit the fact that the town was the birthplace of the Co-op, John Bright and Fields ("the Madonna of her day").
Farnell adds that despite "the deepest recession in living memory and the worst ravages of the Tory-led coalition, the town is fighting back". "We are not a forgotten wasteland, but a proud town with a great history and, I believe, an even greater future. I know all the hard work and painstaking planning of recent years is about to bear huge dividends with increased jobs, skills and prosperity; and a thriving place in which to live, work and play."
Ultimately, though, regeneration requires an increase in effective demand. The formerly run-down parts of London that are now buzzing have done so through an increase in spending power. Businesses have been created; people with money have been attracted in; wages have been driven up; bars and restaurants have opened up as a consequence.
Rochdale has a long way to go before it becomes the new Hoxton, but things could be done to hasten change. Local businesswoman Julie Bowmer says high business rates are contributing to the town centre's problems. "We have no real high street shops – not even a Starbucks or a Costa Coffee."
Danczuk says a Labour government would make a difference through the encouragement of regional banks, higher lending to business, a cut in business rates and the jobs guarantee for young people. But he is dubious about one way of raising demand – a big increase in the minimum wage. "I am not convinced about raising the minimum wage dramatically. There would be an impact on the private sector."
Bowmer is confident the town can make it. "Rochdale was an industrious town, one of the leaders of the industrial revolution, and it still is an industrious town. It's just that people have been battered down.
"The people gave up on the town. It was a general malaise, a feeling that we weren't as good as other people. Taking away the town's industry left people without a purpose. The number one thing is the mood. Once people have their pride back hope will only grow.
"What's to stop Rochdale becoming an IT hub? I would love Rochdale to become a mini Silicon Valley. It might sound ridiculous but ridiculous sounding things can be done."
