Britain's manufacturing is humming; output is strong and order books are full to bursting. If the survey conducted by the CIPS and Markit is accurate, the ground lost in the recession of 2008-09 is being made up at a rapid rate. The outlook for the rest of the year looks promising, which is one reason the pound is currently riding high on the foreign exchanges.
So far, industry has coped well with the strength of sterling. Whether it would continue to do so if the pound appreciated by a further 10% is questionable. Certainly, the An even bigger threat to the durability of Britain's recovery comes from productivity. The latest data from the Productivity matters because it is by getting more efficient that living standards increase. There are two schools of thought about the UK, one optimistic and one pessimistic. The upbeat view says that most of the recent fall in productivity has been caused by a combination of under-reporting of activity and of cyclical factors. There is, for example, some evidence that estate agencies kept on their staff during the slump in the property market because they wanted to grab what little business there was. An increase in housing transactions should mean productivity of estate agents will pick up.
But this pick-up in cyclical productivity is long overdue and the delay inevitably raises questions – not least at the Bank of England – about whether there are structural factors at play. Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight mentions two: there has been a slump in investment in the last six years and this may have resulted in employees working with clapped-out kit and so becoming less efficient; the financial crisis has prevented capital from being allocated efficiently, with zombie companies propped up at the expense of innovative new firms.
The Bank wants to believe that productivity will start to improve as investment starts to kick in and the repair job on the banking sector is completed. But its patience is not inexhaustible. Interest rates will rise if productivity does not show signs of improving fast.
