Expectations are high, probably unrealistically so. After the bloody nose received by mainstream parties in last week's elections to the European parliament, former US treasury secretary Larry Summers had some harsh things to say on US news network CNN about the mess that policymakers had made of things: "The European common market, European monetary union, was an elitist project that was driven by elites, that led to consequences that were entirely unpredicted by elites, that have been catastrophic for millions of people."
Draghi can do little to rekindle love for the idea of ever-closer union in Instead, the ECB meeting will have a less ambitious, but still crucial, agenda. As Investec economist Philip Shaw puts it, Europe's central bank has four key objectives this week: "To ease policy to meet its inflation target; to prevent inflation expectations from being dislodged to the downside and increasing the risks of deflation; to stem upward pressure on the euro; and to secure and preferably speed up the recovery, possibly by encouraging credit flow."
This is not just a question of preventing the eurozone from becoming the new Japan – where activity is relentlessly weak and both consumers and businesses are deterred from spending by the knowledge that deflation will lead to prices being lower in the future than they are today. The ECB also has to take into account that some parts of the eurozone have suffered from Great Depression-style falls in output since 2008 and that many economies are operating way below pre-recession levels.
What's more, the big discrepancies in economic performance across the eurozone – especially between Germany and France – will put increasing strains on the central bank.
Estimates by the Centre for Economic and Business Research suggest Greek economic output will be more than 23% lower at the end of 2014 than it was in 2008. Italy, Spain and Portugal will have seen declines of 7%, 6% and 6% respectively while even Ireland, the poster child for austerity, will still be operating 4% below its pre-recession level.
The eurozone emerged from double-dip recession a year ago, but its recovery has been modest. Exports have been hampered by the slowdown in the global economy and by the strength of the euro. Investment has been constrained by the unwillingness or inability of banks to lend. Unemployment, which averages 12% across the eurozone, has discouraged consumer spending.
Latest data suggests that consumer and business confidence is picking up, but even so, growth this year currently looks like coming in at around 1% – not fast enough to prevent disinflationary pressure from growing. The cost of living across the 18-nation single-currency area rose at an annual rate of 0.7% in April, well below the ECB's target of "below but close to 2%". The bank will publish its own forecasts for inflation on Tuesday, but markets anticipate that it will pencil in a figure of only around 1.3% for 2016. That leaves Draghi with plenty of scope for action and he said at last month's ECB meeting that he and his fellow policymakers would feel "comfortable" with acting next time.
All that is at issue is what form of the attempted policy stimulus will take. There are three possibilities:

■ Of rather greater interest will be what Draghi does to the deposit rate – the interest banks get when they lodge money with the ECB. The strong speculation is that at this week's meeting it will become the first major central bank in the world to announce a negative rate, probably -0.1%. What that means is that will cost banks money to deposit money at the ECB. The hope is that they will lend the money out instead.

■ Here, the ECB is likely to come up with its own version of the Bank of England's Funding for Lending scheme, which gave banks access to cheaper credit but only on condition that it was lent rather than hoarded. In the past, the ECB has used long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) to provide help to eurozone banks: a more targeted LTRO looks likely this week.

■ Most analysts believe the threat of deflation would need to get more serious before the ECB took this step, although Jennifer McKeown at Capital "We still think a bolder programme of asset purchases will be necessary to get the recovery going and avoid prolonged deflation," she says.











