Necessity is the mother of invention, so it is said, and it was the government's need to get the economy moving ahead of the 2015 general election that spawned the Treasury's Help To Buy (HTB) scheme. The basic idea was that George Osborne would provide guarantees that would increase demand for new homes and allow prospective buyers lacking a big enough deposit to get a foot on the property ladder.
The chancellor is supposed to have made a terrible blunder with HTB, which is now blamed for providing oxygen for the This thesis, however, is not supported by the data. There were only 385 mortgages granted under the second phase of HTB in London in the first six months of the scheme's operation. Only 2% of the loans nationally were for more than £350,000.
Indeed, to the extent that the Treasury's aim was to boost the market in the regions furthest away from London, the scheme has been a success. That has been where the admittedly modest demand for HTB mortgages has been strongest, and there is no evidence that it has contributed to national house price inflation.
Logically that has to be the case, given that in the six months to March there were only 7,000 mortgages granted under HTB's second phase, a mere 1.7% of the total number of home loans completed during that period.
It is fair to conclude, then, that there are other reasons for the strength of the London market. The city's status as the world's capital makes it a safe haven for overseas money in times of trouble in places such as the Ukraine; there are plenty of rich cash buyers; official interest rates have been pegged at 0.5% for more than five years; and London's fast-growing economy has increased demand for homes at a time when supply has barely increased at all.
It is also reasonable to conclude that Mark Carney has a cost-free way of showing how serious he is about avoiding a property boom-bust. All he needs to do is halve the limit on Help to Buy mortgages to £300,000. It would have zero impact on transactions but would send out a strong message.
