The business secretary, Vince Cable, has said the government will tackle abuses of zero-hours contracts once a fuller picture of the number of employers using the controversial labour-hiring system becomes available.
Cable said he was hopeful a "comprehensive picture" would emerge within the next few months, after the Office for National Statistics admitted the practice could be far more widespread than first estimates suggested.
The ONS said last month that at the start of the year a study of 5,000 firms had shown there were 1.4m employee contracts in existence that did not guarantee a set number of hours but that provided work during a two-week period. But it added that more investigation was needed into an estimated 1.3m contracts that did not provide any work during the period studied.
Pressed by the Labour MP Frank Field, Cable said: "I recognise the need for reliable estimates on zero-hours contracts. This is why, last autumn, I wrote to the ONS to ask them to revise previous methodologies to help achieve a more accurate estimate of the scale of zero-hours contracts being used by our workforce today.
"They recently published the first of these new estimates and have committed to carrying out further detailed surveys later this summer. This goes a long way to achieving the comprehensive picture I hope will emerge in the coming months.
"Whilst these types of contracts can provide important and flexible employment opportunities, it is also clear there has been some abuse of those on zero-hours contracts by some less scrupulous employers. That's why I consulted on the way to tackle those abuses and will shortly be publishing the results of the consultation."
Field said he was concerned that almost 10% of the working population might be on zero-hours contracts. In a letter to the business secretary, the MP for Birkenhead, said: "As it is such an important issue, suggesting a most fundamental change to how part of the labour market works, might I ask you please to investigate this further so we can gain a fuller picture of the workforce who do not have a guaranteed minimum number of working hours?"
The ONS said those not included in the original estimates of zero-hours contracts included agency staff; those who did not want to work; those on holiday or sick leave and those people not offered any work.
Ed Miliband has pledged that a future Labour government will bring in legislation to provide better protection for those on zero-hours contracts. 
The ONS said that women, the young and the over-65s were more likely to be on zero-hours contracts. It added that nearly two-thirds of people employed on zero-hours contracts work part time compared with about a quarter of people not on the contracts.
"On average, someone on a zero-hours contract usually works 25 hours a week compared with 37 hours a week for people not employed on zero-hours contracts," the ONS said. "Just over a third of those employed on a zero-hours contract want more hours, with most wanting them in their current job. This is somewhat greater than for people not employed on a zero-hours contract."
