It's really not happening in the eurozone. An already feeble recovery lost momentum in the first three months of 2014 and the signs are no better for the current quarter. The 18-nation single currency area is nowhere near achieving escape velocity, the rate of expansion that would start to make inroads into mass unemployment and prevent the drift towards deflation. Action from the European Central Bank next month is inevitable.
The nugatory growth in early 2014 was all the more disappointing because of an unusually mild winter. That had led economists to expect activity to pick up by 0.4%; instead it was just half that figure, a weaker performance than in the final three months of 2013. Had it not been for the robust growth posted by Germany, things would look even more dismal.
Some of the weather-related boost to output will be paid back in the second quarter. In addition, there have been signs recently that the tension in Ukraine is eating into business and consumer confidence. China's slowdown will have an impact on Germany's export-dependent economy. For those reasons, it is hard to see growth accelerating in the second quarter.
That, though, is not the end of the eurozone's problems. The commercial banks are still weak following the losses made in the 2008-09 recession. Credit taps have been turned off and, unlike in the UK or the US, there has been no attempt at off-setting action by the European Central Bank. The ECB's balance sheet is shrinking not expanding.
This lack of finance is making it hard for the recovery to get traction. The eurozone now looks a bit like the UK economy in 2011 and 2012, when activity was bumping along the bottom. In some quarters output picked up only to fall back again. Threadneedle Street responded in two ways; it expanded its quantitative easing programme, under which banks could exchange government gilts for cash. And it encouraged them to recycle that cash back into the economy through the Funding for Lending Scheme, which provided incentives for banks to lend to homebuyers and businesses.
Something similar would not go amiss in the eurozone, although on past form the ECB will get there gradually. A cut in interest rates next month is now fully discounted in the financial markets. This, though, should be buttressed by incentives for banks to lend, particularly in the weaker economies. A full-blown QE programme is likely to be held in reserve at this stage, but is looking increasingly inevitable.
