Goldilocks is back. That was the message from Mark Carney as the governor of the Bank of England delivered his quarterly update on the state of the economy.
Growth will average 3% a year for the next three, the amount of slack left after the deep recession of 2008-09 will be used up only gradually, inflation will hover around the government's 2% target, unemployment will continue to fall gently and productivity will eventually return to its pre-recession levels.
The economy is neither too hot nor too cold, which is why official interest rates are staying put for the time being. In the financial markets, there has been much speculation lately about the timing of the first increase in borrowing costs.
Carney was keen to put this speculation to bed. Nothing had really changed since the Bank's last inflation report in February, although the passage of time means that the economy has edged closer to the point at which rates will be lifted from the emergency level of 0.5%.
At the margin, there have been developments since February. Three months ago the Bank's estimate of the amount of spare capacity was 1-1.5% of national output: it now thinks it is closer to 1% than 1.5%. The unemployment rate by early 2017 is now predicted to be 5.9% rather than 6.3%.
But the Bank is content with the way things are progressing. There was no hint from Carney that rates are going up this year, with the first move likely to be in the first half of 2015. Threadneedle Street's aim has been to use forward guidance to reassure households and businesses that they can borrow without the risk of an imminent rise in borrowing costs. This strategy remains in force.
The question, though, is whether Britain will continue to be a Goldilocks economy. Consider the evidence. The economy grew by more than 3% in the year to the first quarter of 2014 with no sign of the pace of expansion abating.
House prices are rising at an annual rate of around 10%, depending on which measure of the property market is used. Unemployment has come down much more rapidly than the Bank was expecting when it announced forward guidance in August. Interest rates remain at 0.5%, providing a considerable stimulus to the economy for a sixth successive year.
Carney did not mention Goldilocks in his press conference. Instead, he used a World Cup metaphor, describing the economy as having come through the qualifying rounds but with the bigger test lying ahead. To which he might have added: pre-tournament confidence is quickly dashed as structural weakness become apparent, leading to the team returning early, bitter postmortems on what went wrong, and calls for the manager's head.
