The free-market thinktank that inspired many of Margaret Thatcher’s reforms has now turned critic of the Iron Lady’s shakeup of the City in the 1980s, suggesting it increased state regulation of the financial sector, making it too burdensome. 
While the left has blamed the liberalisation of finance under Thatcher for the crisis that paralysed the banking system and led to the deepest UK recession of the post-war era, the Institute for Economic Affairs says the 1980s involved private regulation being replaced by less effective statutory regulation.
Philip Booth, the IEA’s editorial and programme director, says in a new pamphlet that Thatcher’s record was mixed – with deregulatory policies such as the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and the opening up of the City in Big Bang reforms of 1986 accompanied by tougher state controls that have increased the cost of regulation 15-fold.
“The Thatcher government presided over a significant increase in the statutory regulation of financial services,” Booth says in Thatcher: myth of deregulation? “This involved a growth of regulatory bureaucracies, detailed financial regulation and the cost of regulation.”
London’s position as a global financial centre was reinforced by Big Bang, which ended fixed commissions for share trading, abolished the distinction between brokers and jobbers, and allowed foreign ownership of UK firms.
Over the next two decades, the UK financial sector grew in size but in the wake of the financial crisis of 2007-09 all parties agreed that regulation had been too lax. Since 2010, George Osborne has toughened up regulation and put the Bank of England in control of City supervision.
Booth’s pamphlet challenges the view that the 1980s was an era of deregulation. “It is commonly believed that during the 1980s “Big Bang in 1986 did remove the restrictive practices and largely private regulation that existed in securities markets. However, this involved the state unwinding systems of private regulation and was not, as such, a simple act of deregulation.”
Booth says the Financial Services Act that was passed in 1986, the same year as Big Bang, involved a “major expansion of regulation”.Retail financial products that had previously been regulated by contract law, professions and industry agreements became heavily regulated at the retail level through the Financial Services Act. Booth says industry agreements that had been effective in reducing “mis-selling”, such as the maximum commission agreement, were made unlawful, while government regulation of employment contracts, which required firms to allow employees to opt out of occupational pension schemes, led to the pensions mis-selling scandal of the late 1980s and early 1990s.
The IEA study says there were around 80 people involved in bank regulation in 1979, with a small number of people supervising the insurance industry from the Department of Trade and Industry/Board of Trade.“By 1990, the number of employees involved in financial regulation had risen roughly five-fold – with the number involved in non-commercial bank regulation rising by a much greater margin. Overall, from 1979 to 2010 there was an increase from one regulator for every 11,000 people employed in finance to one regulator for every 300 people employed in finance.
“Since the 1980s, the financial sector has been regulated by statutory bodies developing thousands of paragraphs of prescriptive statutory regulation and has gradually extended its reach into new fields. It is true that Thatcher undertook certain liberalising reforms such as the abolition of exchange controls. However, state regulation of securities and financial markets became much more intrusive.”
Booth says that if the cause of the recent financial crash was deregulation, “then it has to be accepted that markets developed more comprehensive systems of regulation when left to themselves than when governments started to regulate them after 1986”.