Low inflation is both a boon and a curse for the eurozone. The upside is that pay goes further, leading to higher spending in the shops. The unexpectedly strong rise in retail sales in March is a sign that disinflationary conditions can be good for growth.
The downside is it would take little to propel the eurozone from disinflation into outright deflation, a period of falling prices that encourages firms and inividuals to hoard rather than spend, and increases the real value of debts. For Europe's heavily indebted banking sector, that would be a real problem.
What then is the European Central Bank to do? Probably not a lot for the time being. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has clearly lost patience and wants Thursday's ECB council meeting to cut interest rates and embrace quantitative easing – the money creation programme already used by the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan.
The risk of deflation should not be underestimated. The euro is on the point of breaking through the $1.40 level against the dollar, far too high for countries seeking export-led growth. What's more, weak growth in the money supply is evidence that the credit-creation process remains severly impaired, increasing the possibility that the modest recovery in activity in the past year will peter out. It is worth remembering that it was only when the Bank of England took direct measures to encourage banks to extend loans through its But those expecting action from the ECB this week are likely to be disappointed. Sure, there will be plenty of talk but the chances of an FLS for the eurozone, let alone QE look remote. Forward looking surveys of business suggest that growth may pick up to around 0.5% in the second quarter, good by recent eurozone standards. Consumers are spending more and inflation – primarily as a result of the timing of easter – is up a bit. Germany, hostile to unconventional monetary policy, will take some convincing that any further action is needed. The argument from Berlin is that there are no miracle cures for the euro zone's structural problems.
So what then will it take for the ECB to act? 