Well, we know how the successful nations of east Asia did it. They invested heavily in education. They pinpointed sectors in which they wanted to compete. They chose national champions and backed them over a prolonged period of time. They adopted export-focused economic strategies and were slow and cautious in opening up their domestic markets to foreign competition. They made sure that the financial sector was subservient to the needs of industry.
This is just a thought experiment. Britain cannot be loosed from its geographical mooring and nor can it ever shake off the misguided notion that it is still a great manufacturing force. The likely takeover of If the government was truly serious about rebalancing the economy and arresting the hollowing out of manufacturing, it would be making it clear to The incoherence stems from identifying the pharmaceutical sector as one in which Britain has a global advantage yet washing its hands of a deal that will allow one of the country's few genuinely world-class companies to be swallowed up. On the one hand, George Osborne uses his budgets to make research and development more attractive. On the other, the government is content to accept flimsy promises from Pfizer about safeguards for research and development.
This flies in the face not just of Pfizer's record on closing down research facilities but also of the pharma industry as a whole, where the name of the game is consolidation and cost-saving. On average, past deals have seen average cuts in R&D worth 30% of the pre-tax profits of the company taken over in a merger. Astra made pre-tax profits of about £2bn in 2013.
The short-termism is the failure to see beyond the current financial pressures on the industry, which arise partly as a result of patent expiry, partly as a result of the expense of developing new drugs, and partly as a result of austerity-beset health ministries seeking to save money. Consolidation makes short-term sense in this sort of bracing climate, which is why there has been so much merger and acquisition activity recently.
But it is no accident that pharma is one of Britain's leading industrial sectors. Since the creation of the NHS in 1948, drug companies have been able to invest in new treatments safe in the knowledge that there will be a reliable customer. Indirectly, British taxpayers have provided considerable support for AstraZeneca and will be poorly served by the proposed Pfizer takeover. First will come the loss of high-skill jobs. Second, consolidation means less competition, which will drive up prices.
As to why government policy is misguided, let's start with the obvious. The coalition doesn't have an industrial strategy; it has a tax strategy. One reason AstraZeneca is attractive to Pfizer is that corporation tax is lower in the UK than in the US. A merged company would have its corporate HQ in the US but be domiciled for tax purposes in the UK. For the time being, at least. Attracting foreign companies with the lure of low taxes is a race to the bottom. Sooner rather than later, another country will offer even juicier incentives.
The deal speaks volumes about the lopsided nature of the relationship between corporations and politicians. Companies demand, ministers accede. Tax is one example; trade is another.
Big business, especially in the US, has become extremely frustrated at the lack of progress in the Doha trade liberalisation talks, where it has proved impossible for Washington and Brussels to bulldoze proposals through as they once did. The new strategy involves cutting bilateral deals and bypassing the World Trade Organisation in sectors such as services.
The US is trying to negotiate a trans-Pacific partnership (TPP) and a transatlantic trade and investment partnership (TTIP). Meanwhile a breakaway group of almost 50 countries is involved in talks about a trade in services agreement (TISA).
These proposed trade deals have a number of things in common: the benefits tend to be vastly exaggerated; the talks are hidden from public scrutiny; and the proposals invariably involve ceding even more power to corporate interests, whether in the form of extra-territorial courts to settle investment disputes or making it harder to safeguard public services from privatisation.

How would a transatlantic or a services trade agreement affect the ability of a future government to stand in the way of what will almost certainly become a hostile Pfizer bid for Astra, or to roll back privatisation? The complete lack of transparency in the negotiations means it is hard to know for sure, but a pound to a penny suggests it will become harder, not easier. Britain, needless to say, is full-throated in its support for both TTIP and TISA.
That's because, despite all the talk about rebalancing and supporting key sectors, nothing has really changed. Government policy remains locked in the mindset of the 1980s, where the solution to each and every problem is to cut taxes, lower trade barriers and expose companies to the full blast of global competition. The success of this approach can be judged by the fact that manufacturing's share of GDP is barely above 10%, the UK's share of world manufacturing output is down to 3%, and there has not been a trade surplus in goods since the early 1980s.
Still, at least somebody will be pleased that Astra, which accounts for almost a tenth of UK R&D, is about to lose its independence. It is party time for the lawyers, the mergers and acquisitions advisers, the merchant banks and the PR teams working on the deal. As far as the City is concerned, the clock has been turned back. The glory days of deal-making are back. The crash was all a bad dream. Nothing has changed. Business as usual.
