The pound is at its highest level against the dollar in five years. House prices, according to the Nationwide, are rising at an annual rate of more than 10% for the first time in four years. Order books for UK manufacturers are booming. Three snapshots of the economy all leading to a similar conclusion: the days when the economy was flirting with recession are rapidly receding into the past.
Monetary policy, on the other hand, is still fixed on an emergency setting. Interest rates were reduced to 0.5% in early 2009, when the economy was in freefall, and are still there. What's more, the forward guidance from the This month sees the release of Threadneedle Street's quarterly inflation report. Since the Bank's last health check in February, unemployment has dipped below the 7% threshold for discussing whether higher interest rates might be needed while inflation has slipped below its 2% target. The GDP figures for the first quarter showed the economy growing at an annual rate of 3.1%.
Recent developments mean the policy challenge for the Bank's monetary policy committee has changed. The question is no longer what needs to be done to stimulate activity, but when and how some of the stimulus is removed. The current betting in the City is that the Bank will not move until early 2015. There are some who think it should be a lot sooner than that.
The argument in favour of an early increase is simple: emergency rates should end once the emergency is over. With the Bank expecting the economy to expand by more than 3% in 2014 this is clearly no longer an emergency.
The argument in favour of things as they are is a bit more complex. The prevalence of zero hour contracts and self employment suggests that there is still slack in the labour market. Inflation is well below its target and wage inflation remains muted. Part of the improvement in the economy's growth prospects is the result of forward guidance, which has provided consumers and businesses with the reassurance that borrowing costs will remain low.
This line, though, is becoming harder to hold. The May inflation report is bound to paint a positive picture of the economy and that will affect market sentiment about the timing of an interest rate rise. Dearer borrowing before the end of 2014 is a real possibility.
