A century of American economy is about to come to an end. These are the bald conclusions from reports showing that China is hard on the heels of the US in terms of its share of global GDP and that it won't be long – given current trends in growth rates - before the positions at the top are reversed.
Not so fast, though. China, by virtue of its population, was the world's biggest economy at the dawn of the industrial revolution but lagged behind as countries in Europe and North America industrialised rapidly. As soon as China started its period of catch-up at the end of the 1970s, it was only a matter of time before its sheer size would make it number one. What has been surprising is the speed at which that transformation has taken place, with the date at which the US loses its top dog status constantly brought forward.
John Hawksworth, chief economist at PwC, estimates that the big moment will arrive in 2020; the latest data suggests it could be as soon as this year.
There are two other points to bear in mind. The first is that the calculations rely on using purchasing power parity to assess the comparative size of economies. This allows for the fact that prices tend to be a lot lower in poor countries than they are in rich countries, so incomes stretch further. But the PPP measure can never be 100% reliable given the problems of comparing prices across the world, so it is impossible to be precise about when China will actually become the world's biggest economy.
The second – more significant – point is that even with the use of the PPP method, real living standards in China remain well behind those in the US. Per capita incomes in China, according to the OECD, are 75% of the global average, whilst those in the US are 370%. China's sheer size and its rapid growth rate mean that it is now a global force to be reckoned with when it comes to talks about economic management, trade and climate change. But on the measure that really matters to people – living standards – it remains a poor country.
