The big day is rapidly nearing. At some point in the next couple of months, the output of the UK economy will finally exceed its pre-recession peak.
What the latest growth figures show us is that the economy expanded by 0.8% in the first three months of 2014. Most of the surveys suggest that a similar pace of activity is likely in the second quarter. Output is now only 0.6% below where it was in early 2008. So, unless something untoward happens, the catch-up point is imminent.
It has, in all honesty, been a long time coming. The recession was deep and the recovery – until the last 12 months – painfully slow. Slower even than after the Great Depression of the 1930s.
But there is now growth across virtually the whole economy. Most of the expansion between January and March was accounted for by services, in part because services make up almost four-fifths of the economy and in part because parts of the service sector – housing, retailing, business services – all performed strongly. Construction was a tad weaker than expected, with the 0.3% growth perhaps suggesting that increased demand for property has yet to feed through into more housebuilding.
One sector that continues to struggle is North Sea oil production, which may spice up the debate in Scotland over independence. Excluding oil and gas output, which has been declining steadily for more than a decade, the economy would already be bigger than it was before the recession.
In the City, the growth figures were a bit of a yawn. Solid, but unspectacular, was one comment. If anything, the markets had been primed for something a little perkier, particularly after the Bank of England said last week that it expected first quarter growth to be in the region of 1%.
Had the Bank's prediction been proved right, there would have been plenty of discussion about the timing of the first increase in borrowing costs. Some economists, it is true, are urging the monetary policy committee to end more than five years of official rates at 0.5%. But a broad-based 0.8% increase is just about perfect for Mark Carney. It suggests the economy is growing but not growing too fast for comfort. Interest rates remain on hold.
