Cast your mind to 1973. It was the year the Yom Kippur war brought the long postwar boom to a shuddering halt. Sunderland brought off one of the great FA Cup shocks by beating Leeds at Wembley. Britain joined the European Economic Community; Ted Heath was prime minister; the miners went on strike; the charts were full of songs by Sweet, Slade and Donny Osmond.
According to the CBI, you have to canter this far down memory lane to find a time when those running Britain's factories were as upbeat about life as they are today. Of those firms questioned by the employers' organisation, 41% said they were more optimistic than they were three months ago, while 8% said they were feeling gloomier. The balance of +33 points was the highest since 1973.
Other findings in the CBI's quarterly industrial trends survey suggest this is more than froth. Orders and output are running at their highest levels since the mid-1990s, despite the still feeble recovery in the eurozone, the rise in the value of the pound and the tension in Ukraine.
Katja Hall, CBI chief policy director, says the report should be taken as a sign not just of rising confidence but of a better balanced economic recovery in which manufacturing plays a more prominent role. That will be music to George Osborne's ears.
The upbeat tone of the industrial trends survey sits a little oddly with the minutes from the latest meeting of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee. Sky-high levels of confidence among manufacturers are normally only seen at the very end of long periods of strong growth: 1973, the Lawson boom of 1988, the pre-crash high of 2006. The economy expanded by more than 5% in 1973, the single biggest rise of the postwar era and the culmination of a quarter of a century of almost uninterrupted growth in the global economy.
Threadneedle Street is much less bullish. It thinks the UK is still in the early stages of a recovery, and the MPC points to downside risks such as the 5.5% current account deficit, the slowdown in China, and the possibility that wage growth will remain weak. The nine members of the committee were unanimous in voting for interest rates to stay put at 0.5%.
Whether they will remain of one voice for much longer remains to be seen. Unemployment is now below the Bank's 7% threshold and the details of the CBI report are extremely strong. Investment intentions are at their highest in 17 years, the expectations for domestic orders and output are also at levels not seen since the 1970s.
And although the economy is in many ways a completely different beast from that of four decades ago, there is one striking similarity. The boom of 1973 was built on expansionary policies – cuts in interest rates, easy credit, and big budget deficits. It was the year that rising inflation did for the reckless Barber boom.
Inflation is currently falling not rising and the City view of the MPC minutes is that the Bank intends to keep official interest rates at 0.5% for another year. But with both business and consumer confidence high, the housing market humming, and next week's first-quarter GDP figures likely to show growth of close to 1%, any signs of the economy overheating may force the Bank's hand well before that.
