The phrases are familiar enough: innovation is critical to a modern economy; Britain's future lies in harnessing new ideas; competing on price is a dead end.
So how are we doing in the cut-throat struggle to be a hi-tech, high-productivity, high-wage economy? Not that well, if the government's latest figures for spending on research and development (R&D) are to be believed.
The latest data shows spending down by 2% in real terms in 2012, and falling as a percentage of GDP.
Five years ago the last Labour government set a target of R&D spending reaching 2.5% of national output by 2014. The fall, from 1.77% to 1.72% of GDP in 2012, means there is not the remotest prospect of this target being met.
There's more: Britain is in the bottom half of the EU league table for R&D spending and a country mile behind states, such as Germany and Finland, where they do more than talk about the need for innovation.
R&D in the UK is heavily concentrated among a handful of sectors, led by pharma (25% of the total), and among big companies. Innovation is pitifully low among independent small companies employing fewer than 250 people.
What we invest in R&D is a good, if not exact, proxy for innovation. And a smaller percentage of the nation's output goes into R&D than it did in the mid-1980s.
Little wonder that the productivity figures look so grim.
But things may not be quite as bad as they look.
The recession and its protracted low-growth aftermath clearly dampened the animal spirits of business. There are reasons to believe investment in pharma will boost the figures in future years. It will take time for some of the government help for innovation, such as the Technology Strategy Board (TSB) and the catapult centres to bring together business and academia, to make a difference.
That said, addressing the weakness of R&D spending should be a priority. Lee Hopley, chief economist at the manufacturers' organisation, the EEF, puts it this way: "The policy landscape is right. It just needs to be put on steroids."
Quite right. The government should aim to pump-prime innovation in new and potentially lucrative sectors ,such as green technologies.
Ministers need to understand that decent initiatives such as the TSB would be more effective at reaching smaller firms if they were given a bigger budget. That, though, means more money both for science and for the spin-offs of that research.
