The upward trend in high-street activity came to a halt last month as storms battering southern England kept consumers out of the shops.
The monthly health of spending survey conducted by the British Retail Consortium and the consulting firm KPMG found that like-for-like sales adjusted for increases in floorspace were 1% lower in February than a year earlier.
Online sales rose strongly as the wet weather kept consumers at home and were 14.3% higher last month than in February 2013. The two best performing categories of in-store sales – home accessories, and flooring and furniture – reflected the recovery in the housing market.
David McCorquodale, KPMG head of retail, said: "February saw a hiatus on the high street, with online sales soaring while in-store sales stalled. There's no doubt inclement weather exacerbated this trend, but it certainly underscores the importance of having a sophisticated online operation."
He added: "There were some bright spots amidst the gloom. The effects of a rapidly recovering housing market are already feeding through to the retail sector, with sales of furniture and home accessories remaining solid."
A separate report from Ipsos Retail Performance found that shopper footfall was down across the country last month, with the biggest declines seen in the south-west and Wales, regions particularly hard hit by the weather. The sample of more than 4,000 non-food stores across the UK reported a decline in footfall of 5.3% against February 2013 and a month-on-month fall of 12.2%. Worst affected were south-west England and Wales, where numbers for the month fell 8.1% on 2013.
"The inclement weather proved to be very disruptive on many fronts last month and retailing was one of the unfortunate casualties," said Tim Denison, director of retail intelligence at Ipsos Retail Performance. "Extreme weather conditions can have quite an impact on store footfall, but it's usually pretty short-lived. What we saw in February was unusual, in that most of the month was affected. After a couple of busier months that saw year-on-year growth, it's disappointing to see footfall figures turn red again. February, though, is typically the quietest month of the year, so the consequences are not as serious as they would have been at other times."
Helen Dickinson, director general of the British Retail Consortium, said slower growth was to be expected following record sales figures in January and the comparisons being made with strong activity in February 2013. In the latest three months, total sales were 2.8% up on the period from December 2012 to February 2013.
"Once again, furniture and home accessories were the best performing categories", she said. "This further illustrates the impact of the continued recovery in the housing market on the wider economy. On the other hand, food sales continued to stay relatively flat."
