The International Monetary Fund has urged the In its assessment of global prospects published ahead of the meeting of G20 finance ministers in Sydney, the IMF said recovery from the deep global recession had been disappointingly weak and urged stronger co-operation between developed and developing countries to promote growth and financial stability.
"A new risk stems from very low inflation in the euro area, where long-term inflation expectations might drift down, raising deflation risks in the event of a serious adverse shock to activity," the Fund said.
It added that the eurozone was "turning the corner" from recession to a recovery that was uneven and fragile. Low inflation added to the problems of the troubled countries on the fringes of the euro area, where it would increase the real burden of already high levels of public debt.
"In the euro area, more monetary easing is needed to raise the prospects of achieving the ECB's inflation objective, including by supporting demand, given the weak and fragile growth, large output gaps and very low inflation," said the Washington-based IMF.
It said further ECB action could include cheap loan schemes, possibly targeted at small and medium sized firms, and "further rate cuts, including mildly negative deposit rates, to support demand and reduce fragmentation"
The Fund urged the US to consult with other members of the G20 – a group of leading advanced and emerging nations – about its plans to withdraw gradually the stimulus provided to the American economy.
"Concerns about the withdrawal of unconventional monetary policy [the bond buying programme known as quantitative easing] in the US have already provoked sharp price movements in emerging markets", the Fund said.
It added that the return to normal conditions would lead to capital flowing out of emerging markets, "with risks of lower investment and, potentially, financial disruptions, notably in those with domestic weaknesses."
The Fund stressed that advanced economies should avoid removing stimulus too quickly given that there was still a large amount of slack to be used up, inflation was very low and governments were trying to reduce budget deficits.
"There is scope for better cooperation on unwinding unconventional monetary policies, including through wider central bank discussions of exit plans. In the euro area, repairing bank balance sheets remains critical to monetary policy transmission. Finally, fiscal consolidation should proceed at a measured pace, while preserving the long-run growth potential of the economy."



