It says something about diminished expectations for the eurozone that quarterly growth of 0.3% should be seen as good news, but after the travails of the past four years Europe's policymakers know how to be grateful for small mercies.
There were three things to welcome in the data for the final three months of 2013: the increase in activity was slightly higher than forecast, it was a generalised pickup, and there were tentative signs of a recovery in investment.
That said, both the headline GDP and the detailed breakdown of the data suggest that the eurozone is still a long, long way from returning to good health. Quarterly growth of 0.3% is half the pre-crisis trend and not nearly strong enough to make a real dent in an unemployment rate in excess of 12%.
Eurozone growth is also heavily dependent on exports. That is true not just of Germany, but also of France and the Netherlands, all of which registered better than predicted performances in late 2013. Consumer spending remains weak, hardly a surprise given job insecurity and austerity programmes.
The hope is that these two headwinds will gradually abate in the months to come. The squeeze from austerity will be less severe in 2014 than it was in 2013 and the upward trend in unemployment appears to have peaked.
But it is worth noting that in the UK it took special measures – the funding for lending scheme and Help to Buy – to give consumer spending a boost via a recovery in the housing market. The eurozone has nothing similar, and it is hard to see how – especially in an environment where banks are unwilling to lend – the recovery should broaden out from exports to the household sector.
At best, the eurozone is likely to continue growing at its current rate, with the risk that problems elsewhere in the world – such as a slowdown in demand from emerging markets – lead to weaker export growth.
Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, should be careful not to draw the wrong conclusions from the GDP data. Sure, it beat expectations. But growth running at an annual rate of 1% is not sufficient to combat the eurozone's two big problems: debt and deflation.
