We've been here before. Twenty years ago, with the US economy recovering strongly from recession, the then chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, started to tighten policy. Markets reacted badly, particularly in the emerging world, to rising US borrowing costs. Mexico was the first domino to fall: Thailand; South Korea, Indonesia and Russia followed within the next four years.
History is now starting to repeat itself. Although the Fed is currently not tightening policy (merely reducing the amount of monthly stimulus) the reaction in financial markets since the turn of the year has been as violent as it was in the spring of 1994. Tokyo's Nikkei fell by 4% on Tuesday and both it and Hong Kong's Hang Seng index have fallen by more than 10% since their recent peaks.
To be fair, the recent market gyrations are not just the result of Fed tapering. There are also worries about China's slowing economy and the fragility of some of the world's leading emerging markets. Turkey is seen as the likeliest candidate to be the Mexico of this emerging markets crisis.
That, of course, assumes that this is a crisis rather than just a wobble. Most of the sage voices in the financial markets are of the view that the fundamentals of the global economy are good. With monetary policy continuing to support growth, they are inclined to view sell-offs as buying opportunities, a chance to get in while prices are low. So far, there has been none of the capitulation you get when a crisis really takes hold. In those circumstances, investors forget all about "buying opportunities" and dump the lot.
It would, though, be very unwise to rule out the possibility that this "wobble" could turn nasty. For a start, the world's capital markets are pretty much the same as they were two decades ago. Capital pours in when times are good and pours out when times are bad.
Secondly, the period since last May, when the Fed first announced it was thinking of tapering, has exposed the structural weaknesses of some of the bigger emerging economies: not just inflation-prone Turkey and Argentina, but commodity-dependent Russia and infrastructure-weak India. If investors need an excuse to pull out they don't have to look very hard.
Finally, crises go through easily defined stages. First you have the boom, then the denial period when nobody can accept that there is a problem. The next phase is acceptance, a grudging acknowledgement that there a few isolated problems that need to be addressed. The penultimate stage is panic, followed by confession, when sins are repented.
So where are we now? Somewhere between denial and acceptance at a guess.
