India's central bank governor has blamed the US and other western nations for the financial tremors shaking emerging markets as he attacked the way the US was withdrawing its colossal stimulus programme.
On the day strong American growth figures pointed to further tapering away of the US Federal Reserve's bond-buying programme, Raghuram Rajan said it was time the role played by developing countries in hauling the global economy out of recession was remembered in Washington and other developed country capitals.
Important emerging economies – including Russia was the latest country to feel the pressure as the fall in the rouble to its lowest level for five years prompted the central bank to threaten speculators with unlimited intervention.
The Fed announced on Wednesday that the "International monetary co-operation has broken down," Rajan, a former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, said in a Bloomberg India TV interview. "Industrial countries have to play a part in restoring that [co-operation between central banks], and they can't at this point wash their hands off and say we'll do what we need to and you do the adjustment.
"Fortunately the IMF has stopped giving this as its mantra, but you hear from the industrial countries: We'll do what we have to do, the markets will adjust and you can decide what you want to do," he added. "We need better co-operation and unfortunately that's not been forthcoming so far."
Wall Street responded positively to the growth figures, seeing the strongest growth in annualised consumer spending (3.3%) and a surge in exports (11.4%) as evidence that the economy was at last putting the recession of 2008-09 behind it. The annualised growth rate was lower than the 4.1% recorded in the third quarter.
Rob Carnell, economist at ING bank, said growth in the fourth quarter of 2013 would probably have been close to 3.5% at an annual rate had it not been for parts of the federal government being shut down in October. While inflationary pressure was weak, Carnell added: "This should not be enough to detract the Fed from what looks like will be another $10bn taper at their March meeting, taking monthly QE down to $55bn."
The Dow Jones industrial average was up 130 points by noon in New York, while other markets had a quieter trading session after the recent turbulence triggered by big currency selloffs in Argentina and Turkey. The FTSE 100 in London closed six points lower at 6538, while share prices in Turkey and Argentina both rose.
