Australia will make freer trade the main focus of its 2014 presidency of the Abbott said the world could not spend its way back to prosperity and the aim should make it easier for businesses to operate in an environment where taxes were low, red tape was cut and trade barriers removed.
"I want to make this very clear: as a trading nation Australia will make the most of its G20 presidency to promote free trade. This year's G20 must be more than a talk fest".
His speech came as trade ministers from around 30 countries prepare for a meeting in the Swiss ski resort on Saturday where they will seek to press forward with the Doha Round of talks, now into their 13th year.
The World Trade Organisation secured agreement on a mini-package of measures in Bali last month, including a deal to ease movement of goods across borders. The organisation's director general, Roberto Azevêdo said it was important that the first multilateral trade deal should result in progress on trickier issues, such as agriculture, services and manufactured goods.
"Bali opes up a host of possibilities and we have to exploit them all. We have to be open minded, creative and flexible. We have to learn from our many failures and from our success in Bali."
Azevêdo said work on bilateral deals such as the transatlantic trade and investment partnership between the US and the EU was no barrier to a Doha deal.
"The reality is that most of the divergence is within six or seven countries. If you can figure it out in that core group most of the impasse will be gone.
"Let's talk about the difficult stuff, be open minded and realistic."
Both Azevêdo and Abbott urged a rolling back of trade barriers introduced during the crisis.
"Protectionism has not been a big threat but we have to remain vigilant. 80% of the restrictive measures announced since the crisis are still in place. We need to accelerate the phasing out of these measures."
Abbott said: "At the very least, the G20 this year should renew its commitment against protectionism and in favour of freer markets. Each country should renew its resolve to undo any protectionist measures put in place since the crisis," he said.
"But better still, each country should commit to open up trade through unilateral, bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral actions and through domestic reforms to help businesses engage more fully in private commerce," he added.
