The Child Poverty Action Group could scarcely believe it. The TUC found itself in the unusual position of standing four-square behind More specifically, Osborne would like to see the independent Low Pay Commission raise the hourly rate for adult workers from its current level of £6.31 an hour to £7 an hour over the next two years. That would represent a cumulative 10% increase and restore the real level of the minimum wage to where it was before the crash of 2008-09.
So why this decision to stick up for those on poverty wages? The Treasury say that they have crunched the numbers and decided that in an improving labour market a generous minimum wage settlement this year and next would have no detrimental effects on jobs and growth. Officials think that bigger wage rises will become the norm during 2014 and that those on the lowest wages should not be left behind.
This makes a lot of economic sense. Prices have been rising more quickly than wages for the whole of the current parliament, squeezing real incomes and threatening to put the brake on the recovery. Lobbying for a higher minimum wage is one direct way the government can influence the level of consumer demand.
Predictably, business was sniffy about the idea. The CBI warned against what it called "unaffordable" increases that, if not matched by productivity, might lead to job losses. But only a couple of weeks ago, the CBI was itself calling for firms to raise wages during 2014. It can hardly bellyache now that the chancellor has responded to its call. The past three decades have seen a steady decline in wages as a share of national income: some redressing of the balance is long overdue, and affordable.
It would be heartening to think that Osborne's announcement was entirely about economics. Heartening but naive. An election is a little matter of 16 months away, and the Conservatives feel the need to respond to Ed Miliband's series of populist initiatives. The fact that the chancellor felt the need to make his announcement on the eve of the Opposition leader's speech on reforming Britain's banks smacks of a rattled government desperate to regain the political initiative.
