Good for George Osborne. Good for Mark Carney. And moderately good for the rest of us. That just about sums up the news that the annual rate of inflation has dropped back to 2%, its official target, for the first time in more than four years.
The small decline last month from the 2.1% recorded in November doesn't sound much, but December saw an increase in petrol prices and the first tranche of price hikes from the big six energy companies. Price cuts from supermarkets and early Christmas discounting by overstocked high street retailers helped.
The downward trend is likely to continue. Core inflation, the cost of living minus increases in food and fuel prices, dipped from 1.8% to 1.7%, while the cost of goods leaving factory gates – an early sign of price pressures – was up 1% on the year earlier. A stronger pound will bear down on the UK's bill for imports.
It's pretty clear why this is good news for the chancellor. There are four key measures of how well the economy is doing at a big-picture level: jobs, inflation, trade and growth. At the moment, unemployment is coming down, inflation is falling, growth is robust and the trade deficit is stable, albeit uncomfortably large. Even an economy as riddled with structural problems as Britain's hits a sweet spot from time to time, and this is one of them.
With an election just over a year away, Osborne is in the happy position of being able to say that the decisions he has taken are at last paying off. The likelihood is that 2014 will be as good as it gets, but given that 2014 is a pre-election year, the chancellor is in a much better place than he was 12 months ago, when all the talk was of a triple-dip recession.
Carney's job is made a lot easier by falling price pressure. The unexpectedly rapid drop in joblessness has complicated things for the Bank of England, which said back in August that it would only start to consider an increase in interest rates once unemployment has fallen to 7%. That now looks likely to happen imminently, much earlier than the 2016 date originally pencilled in by Threadneedle Street, but Carney and his colleagues on the monetary policy committee will now be able to say that on-target inflation means shrinking dole queues are consistent with 0.5% borrowing costs. Interest rates remain on hold.
As for the rest of us, the problem for the past few years has been that prices have been rising more rapidly than earnings. Real wages, the value of what our pay packets buy us after inflation is taken into account, are down by almost 8% since the start of 2009: a sizable cut in living standards. Prices are still rising at double the rate of earnings but the gap is smaller than it was a year ago and there is a good chance that at some point in 2014 a tighter labour market and a further drift down in inflation will see real wages start to rise. It will, of course, take years to recoup the losses suffered over the past five years, which is why, for the public, dropping inflation is as yet only modestly good news.
