George Osborne could hardly have timed it better. On the day he laid out his plans to cut another £10bn from Britain's welfare budget, Channel 4 launched Benefits Street, its fly-on-the-wall documentary of what life is like for families in Birmingham living on the wrong side of  the tracks.
Cue an almighty row. The chancellor split the cabinet just as Some members of the viewing public said Benefits Street gave such a false impression that it should be pulled. Others said the programme confirmed their opinions of people described on social media as "low-life scum".
No question, Benefits Street paints a distorted picture. In the real world almost half the residents in such a place would be pensioners, because they are recipients of nigh-on 50% of the welfare budget. Another 20% of those followed by the TV cameras would be people in work but relying on state benefits such as family and income support and tax credits to help them make ends meet.
Nor is it true that the benefits bill is spiralling out of control. The welfare budget rose steadily from the late 1940s and peaked in the 1980s. As a percentage of GDP it fell under the Labour governments of 1997 to 2010.
Despite the stories of people fleecing the state the latest estimates suggest that just over £1bn, or just under 1% of the budget, was lost through fraud in 2011-12. That compares to (almost certainly conservative) estimates of £32bn lost in unpaid tax in the same year.
Yet, in a sense, Benefits Street provides a public service. In the week when the big City investment banks announce their annual bonuses it shows that there is another Britain where people are unable to afford to spend £25,000 on a personalised number plate that spells BU11 ISH, or blow the same amount on a couple of bottles of vintage claret.
The programme ought to prompt a debate about why more than half the children and working-age adults in poverty today actually live in households where at least one person is working and where getting a job is not a guarantee of lifting yourself above the breadline.
Sadly, that is unlikely to happen. Attitudes towards the poor have hardened markedly in the past couple of  decades, with more people saying that they have only themselves to blame for their plight.
This view is reflected in popular culture, and contempt for what was known as the working class. Think Little Britain's portrait of Vicky Pollard, the feckless and stupid single mother, or Andy, pretending to be disabled.
It was quite a different story 40 or 50 years ago. Then many novels, films, TV shows and plays portrayed working people as ambitious, witty and self-reliant. Sure, there were programmes that highlighted poverty, but the poor were viewed with sympathy. In the 1960s film crews were crawling all over Liverpool but they were there to find out what made the Beatles tick not to unearth stories about families on benefits swinging the lead.
In the words of the television series, Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads? Three things really. First, working This was achieved by the combination of Margaret Thatcher and Deng Xiaoping. The Iron Lady attacked the trade unions, and Deng's modernisation programme in China helped transform a series of protected nation-state economies into a global village where capital and jobs could be easily exported.
Finally, the left bought the argument that there was no real alternative to the free-market economic policies of the right. Instead of arguing that poverty could be solved by full employment, strong trade unions and rising real wages, the left decided that the role of the state was to lay on parenting classes, tackle binge drinking, crack down on smoking and change diets.
The message was that the poor could stop being poor if they made the right sort of lifestyle choices.
Throughout this process, stretching back 30 years and more, there has been talk of how the poor should get on their bikes and how the state can use tax credits to make work pay. It has taken the great recession to highlight the shortcomings of a model that, at its root,  relies on tipping the balance of power decisively and permanently in favour of employers.
Julia Unwin, chief executive of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, noted in a recent short book, entitled Why Fight Poverty, that jobs are now more short-term than ever, with a rapid churn between the dole and low-paid work. The labour market has been hollowed out, with a small number of highly paid jobs, millions of badly paid jobs and little in the middle. Graduates have been employed in the relatively unskilled jobs that were once the destination for school leavers. There has been growing exploitation of workers, particularly migrant workers.
Financial pressures have also increased. Housing has become more expensive and harder to get, while the cost of basic goods and services, including food, fuel, transport and insurance, has been rising faster than inflation.
"In short, we have a more or less flat-lining economy, an increasingly polarised labour market and a highly regionalised, localised housing market, combined with stagnating pay and a rapidly increasing cost of living", Unwin  said.
That is the problem. Tackling it is an altogether different matter. It's simple enough for Osborne to cut non-pensioner benefits, but for the policy to work there have to be enough, decently paid, jobs for people to move into. That is not currently the case.
Topping up poverty pay through tax credits was a short-term fix rather than a long-term solution, while getting the poor to eat "five a day" [fruit and vegetables] or adhere to alcohol guidelines, is Osborne's supply-side approach in a different guise.
Here, then, are some alternative suggestions. An all-party consensus to tackle poverty rather than simply tactics for rewarding "hard-working families". Macro-economic policies geared to full employment. A higher minimum wage. Legislation to make it easier for trade unions to organise. A mass programme of house building.
And, an industrial strategy to rebuild Britain's manufacturing base, including the nurturing and protection of sectors seen as crucial to future growth. Additionally, a full-blooded assault on the tax dodging activities of the feral rich, and tougher price curbs on oligopolies.
Alternatively, we could do what some of the bloggers demanded after the first episode of Benefits Street and "shoot the poor". Interestingly, this means capitalism only works for the rich. Karl  Marx would be tickled by it.
