George Osborne is winning the political battle over austerity. That's the conclusion from the latest YouGov poll showing that for the first time since late 2010 more people say spending cuts are good rather than bad for the economy.
Let's be clear. The poll does not mean it made economic sense for the chancellor to take the axe to Whitehall departments and to the welfare bill. Academic studies suggest that the level of activity in the UK would already be above its pre-recession peak rather than 2% or so below it had it not been for the spending cuts and tax increases brought in by Osborne.
The recovery has been a long time in coming and has been the weakest of any country in the G7 bar Italy. What's more, the continued weakness of business investment calls into question the main thrust of Osborne's case: that reducing the budget deficit would boost confidence and make the private sector more confident about expanding capacity.
Politically, though, it is a different story. What has happened since the election is as follows. Back in the early days of the coalition the public said it was up for a bit of belt-tightening but the enthusiasm did not last long.
By the end of 2010, when austerity was starting to bite, the mood had changed and throughout 2011 and 2012 – the years when the economy flat-lined – the public was solidly against the cuts. In the summer of 2012 there was a 20-point gap between those who thought cuts were harming Britain and those who thought they were helping.
Since then, though, the gap has been closing and in the latest YouGov study the lines have again crossed as the return to growth has made the cuts much less politically toxic. The chancellor will see the findings both as a vindication of his handling of the nation's finances and as evidence that the public does not have austerity fatigue. That's just as well given that the Treasury has plans to carry on cutting spending for another five years.
Conversely, the YouGov findings represent a warning to Labour. It would appear that the public bought the argument that austerity would put the brake on growth (as it did) only for as long as the economy was struggling. Voters seem unimpressed with the opposition's current line: that recovery would have happened sooner without the cuts and that the cost of "two wasted years" has been a much higher deficit than was planned back in 2010.
One crumb of comfort for Labour is that while the public is now much less hostile to the cuts, it is still unimpressed with the way the government is running the economy. Just over a third (36%) say the coalition is handling things well, against 54% who say they are managing them badly, with little change in this balance over the past six months.
This may have a lot to do with the nature of the recovery, which is showing up in the data for gross domestic product but not in pay packets. The public will only really believe Osborne's narrative – that cuts were unavoidable and helped to build confidence in the UK – when it translates into rising living standards. Even with inflation coming down, this is unlikely to occur until the second half of 2014.
