Russia faces two years of recession as the sharp fall in oil prices adds to the problems of an economy beset by structural weakness, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has warned.
The EBRD, set up after the collapse of communism in the early 1990s, said And it warned that an escalation of the conflict with Ukraine could, in extreme circumstances, become a threat to the global economy.
Publishing economic forecasts at the start of its annual meeting in Tbilisi, Georgia, the EBRD said: “Deep recession in the Russian economy is having larger-than expected negative spillover effects on countries with which it has strong economic links. The impact of the Russian downturn has worsened the outlook for eastern Russia could face a protracted period of slow growth or stagnation, it said, exacerbated by the fact it is overly dependent on the oil and gas sector. “Low oil prices and sanctions have taken their toll on an already weak economy with deep-seated structural problems,” the EBRD said.
It said: “The economic disruption in the east of the country, the negative impact of the depreciation of the hryvnia, tight economic policies, energy tariffs hikes and a continued contraction of credit are expected to maintain pressures on the economy this year.”
The EBRD, which funds development projects across the former Soviet bloc as well as in Greece, Cyprus and north Africa, said on the assumptions that the conflict with Russia did not worsen, that Kiev kept to its IMF programme and that other significant risks did not materialise, Ukraine would grow by 3% in 2016.
“An escalation of the conflict [between Russia and Ukraine] would have significant spillover effects for the entire region and lead to extension and expansion of the economic sanctions regime. In the extreme scenario, this regional risk can become a global threat,” it said.
After launching programmes in The bank said its baseline assumption was that Greece would reach an agreement with its creditors. The economy would flatline in 2015, but a return to growth in the second half of the year would pave the way for 2% expansion in 2016.
“These forecasts would be rendered invalid in a negative scenario of missed sovereign debt payments, capital controls, limits on deposit withdrawals and the possible introduction of IOUs [pseudo euros] or equivalent instruments to pay domestic obligations,” the EBRD said. “In this case, Greece would likely fall back to a major recession, the size and duration of which are difficult to quantify now.”
