We have been here before, according to the governor of the Carney certainly thinks so. "Such worries have proven misplaced in the past and scepticism is warranted now", he said, adding that the US economy is now 13 times bigger than it was when Hansen first came up with his ideas.
There are three reasons why the governor deserves the benefit of the doubt. Firstly, forecasts of the future tend to be affected by events in the recent past. When economies are booming, the expectation is that the good times will never end. When times are dark, it is impossible to imagine that the dawn will ever break again.
Secondly, it is a bit early to assess what the technological advances of the past couple of decades will mean for growth. There were cars in the US by the end of the 19th century but it was not until after the second world war – with the building of the interstates, the development of the suburbs and the advent of mass consumer prosperity – that the full potential was realised. It could easily be a similar story for the digital revolution, nanotechnology, robotics and biotechnology.
Finally, macroeconomic policy makes a difference. The job of central banks and finance ministries when economies have suffered profound shocks is to nurse them back to health. In the current circumstances that means keeping the level of demand high enough to avoid deflation and reforming the financial system to avoid a repeat of the excesses that led to the crash of 2007.
Why is deflation less of a threat in the US than in the euro area? Because interest rates were slashed, quantitative easing embraced with gusto, and austerity delayed until recovery was under way.
In the US, the economy is now strong enough for the Federal Reserve to consider paring back the stimulus from quantitative easing. There is no immediate sign of the Bank of England doing likewise in the UK, and Carney's message was that supply side changes will happen more quickly if borrowing costs remain low for a good while yet. He is an optimist but not a naive one.
