The deal signed by the 159 members of the World Trade Organisation in Bali is a triumph. But only in the way that Dunkirk was a triumph for Britain in 1940. The The package signed off is what's left of 12 years of haggling, wrangling and stalemate since the Doha Development Round was launched 12 years ago. It adds up to very little.
Trade negotiators set the bar high in Doha. They crafted an ambitious agenda which included freer trade in agriculture, manufactured goods, and services. Trade in environmental goods was included. Ministers pledged to update the WTO's rules to prevent dumping of low-cost products. In the event, it was a classic case of the WTO biting off more than it could chew. There were too many issues, most of them complex and contentious. The talks quickly became embroiled in power games. The expectation in 2001 was that rich countries would provide access to their markets for the agricultural produce of poor countries and in return developing countries would cut tariffs on imported manufactured goods from the west.
This tit-for-tat arrangement proved elusive. By the time Roberto Azevêdo took over at the WTO in the summer all that was left of the original Doha Round was trade facilitation, improving customs procedures to make it easier for goods to flow in and out of countries.
But even so-called "Doha lite" was put at risk when India and the US clashed over food security. New Delhi said it wanted the right to stockpile grain and sell it at cut-price rates to its poor citizens; the US said India had to abide by WTO rules on government food subsidies. India said there would be no trade facilitation deal until the terms of a "peace clause" had been secured. Friday's compromise allows India to keep its temporary arrangement in place for four years until a permanent solution is found.
Azevêdo's relief at the outcome will be tempered by the knowledge that it has taken two decades to negotiate this scanty deal. In the meantime, WTO members have been going their own way, seeking to sign bilateral agreements such as that between the EU and the US. The threat of WTO marginalisation remains.
As Churchill said after Dunkirk: "Wars are not won by evacuations."
