On the face of it, Even though the snapshot of services was slightly down on November, it was still strong. City analysts said that on the basis of the reports from purchasing managers, the economy is on course to grow by well over 1% in the final three months of 2013, up on the 0.8% recorded in the third quarter.
This all fits nicely with the chancellor's narrative for his speech tomorrow: Labour made a right horlicks of things; it has taken longer than we thought to clear up the mess; we stuck to our guns even when things were looking a bit sticky; we are now feeling the benefits; trust us to finish the job.
Although there is scant evidence from opinion polls that this is working, Osborne is convinced that it will come election time in 2015. Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, thinks the public is more concerned about falling living standards than it is about the quarterly increase in gross domestic product.
The report from the Office for National Statistics about spending at Christmas since 1997 explains why Balls is feeling chipper despite the pick-up in economic activity this year. Consumers have continued to have a splurge at Christmas since the economy imploded in 2008 but the squeeze on real incomes means they have become a lot more cautious about parting with their money. Since 2008, judging by the ONS data, they have cut down on the size of the Christmas turkey, drunk less booze and made do with a smaller box of Quality Street.
Prices are still rising more slowly than wages, and that helps explain why the latest data for high-street spending has been softer than expected. Retail sales are not included in the services sector PMI and nor is the public sector, so it is reasonable to assume that the surveys are over-stating the economy's real growth rate in the final three months of 2013.
What's more, the real issue for the next 12 months is when and whether real incomes start to grow. At the moment, consumer spending is being supported by a willingness to run down savings, a trend that cannot be guaranteed to go on for ever. To rebut Balls' line that most people are not yet benefitting from growth, Osborne needs inflation as measured by the consumer prices index to continue falling in the first half of 2014 while wage growth is pushed higher by a tightening labour market. That would produce a first for this parliament: an increase in real wages.
