Earmarking more than £40bn for a new railway would be controversial even in boom times. But it really takes some selling when public services are being cut and real incomes are falling. Building HS2 will cost every adult in the UK the equivalent of £1,000 on current estimates: a tidy sum when a pay rise is a distant memory.
Inevitably, then, Balls should resist the pressure. The shadow chancellor's credo is that taking economic decisions for political reasons is asking for trouble. If the economics are rock-solid, the politics will come right. If the economics suck then the politics will eventually suck too. The economics of HS2 suck.
Traditionally, public money is allocated using cost-benefit analysis. Whitehall estimates the costs of a project and tries to put a monetary value on the benefits. On this basis, HS2 doesn't wash its face. The cost is high and the benefits, in many cases, are spurious.
Supporters of HS2 say that cost-benefit analysis is too narrow a way of looking at the project because it does not capture the need to build more capacity on the rail network.
HS2 will help cope with the threat of overcrowding. But so too would alternative solutions, including upgrading existing lines. Economists use a concept called "opportunity cost" in these circumstances. This takes into account alternative uses of the £40bn-plus cost of HS2 to see whether it could be better spent.
Let's take as an example a project known as GB Freight Route, put forward by the Hopkins's plan has much going for it. Firstly, by using the gauge found on the continent it would make Britain part of a growing European freight network in which trains can carry lorry-sized trailers. Freight would be taken off the roads, easing congestion and cutting pollution. Capacity would be freed up on existing railways.
Secondly, the GB Freight Route would require only 14 miles of new track to be built, and of these nine miles would be in a tunnel and five across rural land. There would be much less of an impact on homes and communities than from HS2.
Thirdly, the proposal is to take the dedicated freight line to parts of Britain not touched by HS2, such as Scotland and the north-east. Fourthly, it would be much cheaper than HS2 even if the cost estimate of £6bn proves to be as optimistic as the early projections for the high-speed line. Finally, there seems to be some interest from supermarkets and haulage companies, which means that some of the cost could be shouldered by the private sector.
It may be that after considering all the alternatives, HS2 remains the best option. But that means giving rival ideas a fair hearing. In the case of HS2, that does not appear to have been the case.
Supporters of HS2 say it is the only game in town. They fear the Treasury will only pay for a high-profile prestige project and that the alternative is not a host of smaller schemes that might offer better value for money but that the £40bn stays with the exchequer. Yes, it's said, HS2 will cost a lot of money. Yes, the project doesn't score well using conventional cost-benefit analysis. But this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to restore economic vibrancy to parts of the country that badly need it.
There is a need for the UK economy to be less dominated by Paul Krugman, one of those who pioneered New Economic Geography, has shown that better transport links between rich and poor regions tend to exacerbate regional disparities. The reason is that big, efficient businesses in the capital have easier and cheaper access to markets elsewhere in the country and drive out local competition.
A study by the Centre for Cities notes that South Korea built a high-speed line from Seoul to Busan with the aim of rebalancing economy that, like the UK, is highly centralised. This has not been achieved.


The case of Lille in Nnorthern France provides a bit more encouragement for supporters of HS2. According to the Centre for Cities report, the arrival of high-speed rail in 1993 played a "significant role in facilitating a structural transformation in a declining industrial city and its hinterland".
There is a rider, however. Lille's revival was not caused by high-speed rail alone. It was combined with "extensive regeneration investment and improvements to local networks, which were supposed to spread the benefits of high-speed rail across the region." One or two secondary centres in northern France did benefit but areas away from the line continued to experience below-average jobs growth.
So, the likely upshot of HS2 is that London will benefit most, the big regional hubs such as Birmingham and Leeds will get some benefit, but cities bypassed by the line will lose out.
It's worth noting, also, that the money saved from scrapping HS2 would find its way into the economy one way or another: handing each adult a cheque for £1,000 would almost certainly provide a bigger boost to economic activity in, say, Rochdale than a new high-speed railway that ends in Manchester.
Centre for Cities notes that the gains from HS2 would increase if the new line could be integrated into local networks, if the HS2 stations were planned for city centres not the edge of town, if fares were kept cheap so services were attractive to attracted consumers (something that has not happened with HS1 in Kent where commuters would rather have a slow journey into work than pay expensive ticket prices) and if the new line was part of a co-ordinated regeneration strategy.
This is all true but it does not look remotely possible. HS2 is a gravy train for the construction sector, lawyers, transport consultants, bureaucrats and the rich people who will be able to afford it. It will be the misery line for just about everybody else.
