interest rates going up faster than expected? Fearful that the Bank of England will be forced to respond to the bubble in the housing market? Starting to get alarmed by the prospect of servicing the big mortgage you have just taken out if borrowing costs were to rise?
Well don't worry about a thing. The economy is not growing particularly quickly by historic standards. There is loads of slack in the labour market despite the big rise in employment seen in the three months to September. And Threadneedle Street is watching the housing market like a hawk, ready to pounce if things get too frothy.
That was the gist of governor Mark Carney's comments when he presented the Bank's quarterly inflation report on Wednesday.
Sure, the Bank continued its dismal recent forecasting record by being too pessimistic about the speed at which the jobless rate is coming down. True, unemployment will now fall to the Bank's 7% threshold much sooner than expected. But that doesn't mean that an increase in the cost of borrowing will automatically follow. It is clearly uncomfortable for the Bank that it has had to tear up its unemployment forecasts within three months of making them, but the governor believes that, without guidance, market interest rates would already be on the rise.
Carney's aim is to provide fresh reassurance to those who have just clambered on to the first rung of the housing ladder that there will be no early rise in interest rates. The fact that inflation is coming down more quickly than the financial markets anticipated makes it easier to continue with stimulative policies for longer than would otherwise have been the case. The pledge to keep rates on hold means that the strong growth seen since the spring will continue into 2014.
According to Carney, the pace of growth will slacken over the next months but the inability of the Bank to spot the recession of 2008 or the flat-lining of 2011-12 makes its views about the current state of the economy less than wholly reliable.
For interest rates to stay low until the end of 2015, however, the economy has to perform the way the Bank expects. Provided inflation remains close to its 2% target, Carney will be under no pressure to raise borrowing costs even if strong growth reignites the housing market. The Bank will rely on its new financial policy committee to keep house price inflation in check by regulating borrowing and lending.
Financial markets are far from convinced and these doubts will grow if the Bank is still underestimating the momentum in an economy that has been awash in cheap money for almost five years now. Any suggestion of overheating will lead to pressure for interest rates to be raised much more quickly. Which is why those treating Carney's forward guidance as gospel would be advised to show some caution.
