Britain's jobless rate is edging closer to the 7% level that will prompt the Data from the The unemployment rate dropped from 7.8% in the three months to June to 7.6% – its lowest level in four years – in the quarter ending in September following the 48,000 drop in joblessness to 2.47 million on the internationally agreed labour force survey measure.
Threadneedle Street has said it will not start thinking about raising interest rates until the jobless rate has hit 7% unless there is a risk of higher inflation or overheating in the property market.
But the ONS figures suggest cost pressures from the labour market are still abating despite the increased availability of jobs.
The ONS said average earnings in the quarter ending September were 0.7% higher than in the same period of 2012 – a 0.1 point drop compared with the three months ending in August 2013.
Britain's rising population means that a record number of people – 29.95 million – are in work but the employment rate remains lower than it was before the deep recession of 2008-09. The current rate of 71.8% compares with 73% at the peak in early 2008 but above the trough of 70.8% reached in 2011.
The bulk of the jobs created in the latest three months were full time but a record 1.46 million people were working part time because they could not find a full-time job. Jonathan Loynes, of Capital "The drop in the unemployment rate from 7.7% to 7.6% in the three months to September increases the likelihood that the committee will predict a faster fall to the 7% threshold set out in its forward guidance than it expected in August's report, potentially implying an earlier rise in interest rates. Note that the MPC expected the unemployment rate to still be at 7.8% in the third quarter."
Chris Williamson, economist at Markit, said: "The UK labour market is booming alongside the recent surge in economic growth. Job creation is surging, with employment up by 177,000 in the three months to September, and surveys suggest further strong growth is to be expected in October. The unemployment rate is down to its lowest for over three years and the number of people claiming unemployment benefits is falling at the fastest rate since 1997. Even pay growth is starting to show a long-awaited revival."
