Inflation is in retreat across the west. Although the City of London was focusing on the unexpectedly sharp fall in the UK's cost of living, this was merely part of a general trend from Hungary to Portugal and from Italy to Germany. Deflation is already a reality for some of the troubled countries on the fringes of the eurozone area. Others are heading in that direction.
For now, that list does not include Britain where the current inflation rate of 2.2% is still (just) above the government target and higher than the eurozone average, which is already 0.7% and likely to fall lower when new figures are out later this week.
But The latest inflation data from the Office for National Statistics is still significant in three material respects. First, it suggests that the cost of living is finally responding to a lack of spending power. The latest data may help to dispel fears that Britain is somehow hardwired to have above-target inflation whatever the circumstances. Core inflation – which excludes volatile energy prices – is currently 1.7%, its lowest for four years. Companies are finding it hard to make price increases stick in an environment where consumers are seeing their real incomes squeezed year after year.
Falling inflation matters politically. The second point to note- as Labour did - is that the gap between price rises and wage increases remains even after the fall in inflation from 2.7% to 2.2%, because average earnings are growing by less than 1% a year. But the Bank of England expects pay awards to edge up next year as a growing economy increases the demand for labour. ONS data for producer prices shows that inflationary pressure in the pipeline is weak, so there is a chance that in 2014 downward pressure on the cost of living and a pick up in average earnings will lead to real incomes rising. That would be welcome news for George Osborne, although it remains to be seen whether the increase is big enough to make consumers forget the hard times.
Finally, falling inflation provides a breathing space for the Bank of England. As Capital The Bank will come up with fresh economic in its quarterly Inflation Report on Wednesdayforecasts today, and that will have a bearing on when the City can expect interest rates to rise. But with inflation coming down, the chances of the Bank moving this side of the election in May 2015 are reduced.
