The economy is cooking with gas and the claimant-count measure of unemployment proves it. That has been what government supporters have been saying in recent months as the dole queues have shrunk. The number of people claiming jobseeker's allowance fell by 120,000 in the latest three months, a far more rapid decline than shown by the Labour Force Survey, the internationally agreed yardstick for calculating joblessnesss.
In truth, it has been impossible to take the claimant count seriously as a guide to the economy since the 1980s, when the then Conservative government changed the methodology 30 times. Only one change led to unemployment going up. The claimant count measures people who are unemployed and eligible to claim benefit. If you are not eligible you don't count.
Clearly, there has been some improvement in labour market conditions in recent months. The number of job vacancies is up and the percentage of people employed has risen, if not yet to the levels seen before the recession began. But there has also been a significant tightening of welfare rules, leading to more people being sanctioned and losing their benefits. Since the new regime was introduced last October, the number of adverse decisions (people deprived of JSA for between four weeks and 36 months) was almost two and a half times as high as in the decade 2000-2010.
Ministers say that they are providing help as well as penalties, and that those coming off the count are finding jobs. This seems unlikely. The economy is just about capable of finding employment opportunities for a workforce that is increasing in size all the time. Demand for labour remains weak.
Many of those sanctioned for minor transgressions, such as failing to show up for an appointment on time, will go back on JSA. The experience of other countries, such as the US, is that others will disappear from the system altogether and become destitute. How that is supposed to plug them back into the labour market, the avowed intention of the toughened up system, is not immediately obvious.
