1,800 manufacturing jobs axed by BAE Systems in Portsmouth, Bristol and on the Clyde; house prices rising at an annual rate of nigh-on 7% … The economy is growing while another bit of the country's industrial base is chipped away. Haven't we been here before?
The answer is yes, many times in the past four decades, even though the current picture is slightly more complex than the bald headlines suggest. Shipbuilding has been in decline in the UK for a century, and what remains of the sector is dominated by defence orders. The supertankers that ship oil and commercial goods around the world have long been built elsewhere.
As a result, shipbuilding jobs rely on orders from the state, and the Ministry of Defence has not been exempt from the spending cuts ordered by George Osborne. Once the two aircraft carriers commissioned by the last Labour government are completed, there will not be enough work for the existing workforce. Hence the closure of Portsmouth and the job losses at Govan and Scotstoun on the Clyde, and at Filton.
Clearly, this is a dreadful blow to the communities concerned, but it is not representative of what is happening to the rest of manufacturing, where official data shows output rising strongly in the past two quarters. Helped by a strong performance by the car industry, manufacturing output was 0.9% higher in the three months to September than in the previous quarter.
So if the BAE job losses are the result of specific issues facing shipbuilding and the rest of manufacturing is growing, doesn't that suggest that the UK can look forward to a broad-based recovery?
Not really. Sure, there has been a pick-up in manufacturing output since the spring, but production was only 1% higher in September than a year earlier, and more than 8% below its level a decade ago. Factory output flatlined between 2003 and 2008, then fell off a cliff when the recession began. Service sector output, by contrast, is already comfortably above its pre-recession peak.
For a better balanced economy, Britain needs a sustained period where industrial production and exports expand more rapidly than the economy as a whole. What is not now needed is an old-fashioned housing boom, which encourages consumers to take on more debt than they can afford and which is ultimately choked off by an aggressive and indiscriminate rise in borrowing costs. News from the Halifax that house prices are 6.9% higher than a year ago suggests, regrettably, that is what we are likely to get.
