The NAPF, the Association of British Insurers and the Investment Management Association – who together might be described as the old-school of the UK fund management industry – all sing the merits of long-termism these days.
This is a welcome development, of course, since somebody needs to argue against the decades-old drift towards corporate under-investment and, as John Kay's review of UK equity markets put it last year, "hyperactive behaviour by executives whose corporate strategy focuses on restructuring, financial re-engineering or mergers and acquisitions at the expense of developing the fundamental operational capabilities of the business."
In practice, though, there are two related problems. The first is turning fine words and good intentions into action. The second is forcing a well-paid investment industry, stuffed with intermediaries making good commissions, to be more radical.
As successes, one could point to the fact that some of Kay's ideas are being pursued. There are plans to spare companies the tedium of quarterly reporting. There is a stewardship code for investment managers to adopt. And shareholders, thanks to business secretary Vince Cable, now have a binding vote on pay at UK quoted companies.
On the other hand, none of these measures amount to a revolution. In practice, US investors would stamp on any widespread attempt by large companies to abandon quarterly reporting. And the stewardship code is so broad you would be hard-pressed to find a mainstream fund manager who finds its ambitions objectionable. For example: is the enthusiastic adoption of zero-hours contracts by some companies compatible with "sustainable" capitalism? That is not a burning question among fund managers.
Meanwhile, the binding vote on pay is an improvement on the previous wishy-washy advisory version – but don't hold your breath if you're expecting fireworks.
As ever, one returns to a key underlying problem: more than half the UK stock market is now owned abroad and corralling foreign investors into a debate on UK corporate governance is an uphill task.
An optimist might conclude it's excellent news that the principle of greater long-termism is being debated in warm terms by the likes of the NAPF. In reality, progress feels excruciating slow. If the Prince had made that point in blistering terms, his remarks would have been more electric.
