Employment is up but earnings growth is down. There are more people in jobs than ever before but the gap between prices and pay is widening. Those were the bullet points from the latest labour market data from the Office for National Statistics.
There are two ways of looking at the state of Britain's labour market. One is to marvel at the number of new jobs being created, seeing recent developments as the example of a flexible labour market in action. Employment increased by 155,000 in the three months to August, and the improved chances of getting work led to fewer inactive people. As a result, unemployment fell by 20,000, leaving the jobless rate unchanged at 7.7%. Seen from this perspective, the unemployment figures show that economic recovery is putting down roots.
But not so fast. If the labour market was really strong, earnings would be going up not down. The latest figures show that the average pay packet was only 0.7% bigger in the three months to August than in the same three months of 2012. With inflation running at 2.7%, that means real incomes are two percentage points lower than they were a year ago. In the public sector, life is even grimmer. There, the government's pay freeze means earnings are falling in cash terms.
Seen from this perspective, the labour market looks less robust. Indeed, it is more like a galley ship in which the wage slaves are strapped to oars and exhorted to work harder for less. Real pay has been falling for the past five years and the average weekly wage is now, according to the Resolution Foundation, at its lowest level for a decade.
The expectation is that the wage slaves will throw off their chains as growth accelerates in 2014. Higher demand for labour will then force employers to offer higher pay, narrowing the gap between prices and earnings. For the time being, though, two conclusions can be drawn from the labour market data. The first is that there is nothing in the latest figures to alarm the Bank of England. Threadneedle Street has said it only plans to think about raising interest rates when the unemployment rate falls to 7% and increased labour market participation means that looks unlikely for some time to come.
The second is that there is a disconnect between official figures showing strong growth and the experience of most Britons seeing the real value of their pay fall year after year. For them, a recovery without rising living standards is no recovery at all.
