pledge to peg private-sector rents to inflation is simple. Britain used to be a nation of home owners but is becoming a nation of renters. For many young people, the dream of buying their own home is dying.
In the past 15 years, a century-long upward trend in owner-occupation has gone into reverse. Almost 70% of homes were owner occupied at the turn of the millennium; today the figure is below 64%, a marked decline in such a short time. 
Buy-to-let landlords can find tenants because young people cannot afford a deposit to buy unless they inherit money or are given a helping hand by parents cashing in the capital gains on their properties. 
Only 43% of 25 to 34-year-olds had a mortgage in 2011-12 compared to 67% 20 years earlier. The trend is particularly marked in London, but young people are also being frozen out of the market in other parts of the country. As Miliband noted when interviewed by Andrew Marr, there are 11 million tenants in private rented accommodation. In a tight election, their votes could be crucial – especially in London.
David Cameron’s idea involves extending the right-to-buy scheme to the 1.3 million housing association tenants. The Institute for Fiscal Studies expressed doubts about this proposal last week, noting that there were uncertainties about the money that could be raised from selling expensive properties, the bill for providing discounts to HA tenants and the cost of replacement properties.
“Given this uncertainty, and the coalition’s less-than-impressive record in delivering replacement social housing under the existing right to buy, there is a risk that these policies will lead to a further depletion in the social housing stock, something the proposal explicitly seeks to avoid.”
Doubtless, the IFS will have something equally sniffy to say about Labour’s proposal when it gets round to publishing its assessment in the coming days. That’s because it fails to address the root of the problem of high rents: the mismatch between growing demand for homes and the lack of supply. Labour’s plans for rent controls will be welcomed by those tenants who feel they are being ripped off by their landlords, but to the extent that they restrict supply they will have similar effect as the Conservative plans.
The sad truth is that housing policy in Britain is asinine and cowardly. It is asinine because at every turn politicians have made worse the imbalance between demand and supply. It has been cowardly because they have known full well that housing policy is biased in favour of the haves rather than the have nots, but they fear the wrath of those who have already done nicely out of rising property prices.
But the stupidity and the cowardice come with a price. A housing crisis has been brewing for the past four decades and could blow at any time. It is a crisis of homelessness, of over-crowding, of sleeping rough and of thwarted hopes. 
Problems first started to surface at the start of the 1970s, with the easing of controls on credit. Before that, credit rationing and a bipartisan policy of building more homes kept demand and supply in balance. 
Squalor was one of the five giants barring the road to progress identified by the Beveridge report in 1942, but the idea that everybody was entitled to a decent home was part of the post-war consensus. More council homes built under the Since then, though supply has never kept pace with demand, with the result that there have been tsunamis of property inflation in the early 1970s, the late 1980s and the mid 2000s. 
A paper by Christian Hilber of the London School of Economics lays out what has happened in stark terms.
Over the past 40 years, the UK has seen house prices rise by more than other country in the rich-nation Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. London is a more expensive city than New York, Hong Kong, Singapore or Paris. In fact, it is more expensive than anywhere apart from the millionaire’s playground of Monaco. Not many new homes are being built in the UK but those that are being completed are 40% smaller than in other European countries that are similarly densely populated. 
The supply of new homes has been limited by tough green belt restrictions, planning laws, the squeeze on local government finance and nimbyism. Demand has increased as a result of a generous tax system for property owners, a rising population and net migration. The mismatch between demand and supply is most pronounced in London, and that is why property is monstrously expensive. The price to income ratio in London is 8.5:1.
Hilber says the UK has an affordability crisis caused by the strictures of the planning system. He has some suggestions for what might be done, including easing changing the planning laws to free up parts of the green belt, financial incentives to persuade local authorities to build, and the replacement of the council tax and stamp duty land tax with a new local property tax with automatic annual revaluations. 
“The obstacles to moving to such policies are vast since these policies antagonise vested interests, which appear to have been created in perpetuity. But the long-run consequences of political inaction – and the continuation of excessively low rates of new building – could prove socially explosive and economically traumatic.” 
Hilber is right. The social costs of the housing crisis are rising all the time but the fear of a backlash from owner-occupiers means the policy response is inadequate. No, make that counter-productive, given that in the past five years two flagship government policies – Funding for Lending and Help to Buy – have increased demand at a time when fewer houses have been built than under any administration since the second world war.
But the basic laws of demand and supply operate. If demand is strong and supply is weak, prices go up. Governments can respond by liberalising planning laws, building more homes, making the tax system less generous, pursuing active regional policies to ease the pressure on London, or by putting curbs on migration. All are difficult, some controversial. But at present, Labour and Conservatives are attacking symptoms not causes. That’s why there’s a crisis and why there will eventually be a crash.
