The last time Britain’s unemployment rate was this low was in July 2008, two months before the collapse of Lehman Brothers plunged the global economy into recession.
Jobs growth in the three months to February was strong, with 248,000 more people in work than in the quarter ending in November. The proportion of people aged 16 to 64 in work stood at 74.4%, the highest since comparable records began in 1971. There were 743,000 job vacancies – up 124,000 on a year earlier.
Once upon a time, all this would have translated into higher pay. More jobs, more vacancies and shorter dole queues have traditionally been signs of a tightening labour market, resulting in employers having to offer higher wages to keep or attract workers.
But according to the latest Office for National Statistics data it is obvious the old rules no longer apply. Back in early 2013, when the economy finally emerged from its post-recession torpor, average earnings were rising at an annual rate of 1%. The latest figures show them rising at 1.7%, and that was slightly down on the previous month. A return to the pre-recession average earnings growth of 4.5% looks a long way off.
One explanation for this is that the cards are stacked in favour of employers, since unions are weaker than they once were. In the public sector, the most heavily unionised part of the economy, earnings growth has halved to 0.9% in the past two years. But the attacks on organised labour began long before the collapse in earnings growth, which means other factors have also come into play.
One is that inflation is much lower than it was, currently standing at 0%. But wage growth was tepid even before the cost of living was brought down by the halving of the oil price in the second half of last year. It may well be, though, that employers will use inflation at 0% to justify low settlements when annual pay talks come around.
What’s actually been going on is that these two long-term trends – weaker unions and lower inflation – have coincided with a structural change to the labour market that has seen an increase in the supply of labour.
There have been four sources of this. Firstly, the population has been rising, with around half of the 2 million increase in employment accounted for by a rise in the number of people of working age.
Secondly, workers from low-growth parts of the eurozone have come to Britain in the hope of finding jobs. The ONS estimates that between late 2013 and late 2014 the number of UK-born people working in Britain rose by 345,000 to 26.16 million while the number of non-UK born working people was up by 260,000 to 4.78 million.
Thirdly, in the last year there has been a 75,000-strong increase in the number of people aged 65 and over who are working.
Finally, tougher benefit rules have led to people who would have been formerly classified as economically inactive joining the search for work.
As a result of this growing reserve army of labour, employers have been under no immediate pressure to offer higher pay even when the economy has been growing at a reasonable lick. This may change, but the signs are that it would take further falls in unemployment for upward wage pressure to build. The reason living standards are going up is not that pay has gone up but because inflation has come down.
