A French magistrate, who hailed a police car instead of a taxi then allegedly lashed out at officers when they refused to take him home, has been charged with attacking a public servant.
The 48-year-old man, who was with his two young children, made matters considerably worse when he allegedly assaulted another two officers when conveyed, still shouting insults, straight to the nearest police station.
The magistrate, who was not named, from the north of France, was alleged to be drunk when he hailed what he thought was a taxi outside the station at Montpellier in the south of the country around 10pm on Saturday evening.
Having stopped the car, he ordered the occupants to drive him to an address – addressing them with the familiar and less respectful 'tu' as opposed to 'vous' – and shouting insults when they refused.
According to French press reports, the police officers in the vehicle quickly came to the conclusion the man was "clearly drunk". Conveyed to the local police station he then allegedly attempted to bite one officer and hit another between the legs.
The Midi Libre newspaper said the man was shame-faced and admitted the accusations when he sobered up on Sunday morning.
"He was not in a normal state and his behaviour was not appropriate and subject to legal proceedings," Patrick Desjardins, assistant prosecutor at Montpellier said.
"He will be summoned before the court … he has enjoyed no favourable treatment, indeed no particular treatment at all and he risks the usual punishment: a prison sentence for violence, fines for the insults."
The magistrate, who is accused of "outrages against the forces of law and order" and assaulting "a person in a position of public authority", faces a fine of up to €7,500 and a maximum of six months in jail. He is expected to appear in court in December.
The man may also face a professional disciplinary hearing, if the Justice Minister, who has the final say in such matters, decides his behaviour is in breach of government regulations requiring magistrates to uphold the "honour, consideration and dignity" of their position.
