French judges have ordered the Swiss bank UBS has until the end of September to deposit the money, which amounts to 42.6% of its after-tax profits and 2.8% of shareholder funds, with the court.
The bank has said it will appeal against the order and the calculation of the amount of the guarantee, which it described as deeply flawed and highly politicised.
UBS is under investigation for allegedly encouraging tax evasion between 2004 and 2012 and has already been fined â‚¬10m by French financial regulators for control failures that could have allowed clients to avoid taxes.
Last year, two French judges ordered a formal investigation into charges of "illegal selling" by the Swiss bank and "complicity" by its French branch, after former staff claimed it had encouraged wealthy clients to set up double bank accounts to hide the movement of capital from France to An anonymous note sent to the Financial Control Authority allegedly detailed how non-declared accounts set up by French sales staff in Switzerland were to be registered on the bank's computers.
In June last year, regulators who had carried out a separate inquiry fined the bank for waiting more than 18 months before setting up the controls required to monitor and stop such activities. UBS said at the time it disagreed with many of the regulator's conclusions.
The new charge of alleged tax evasion was announced by the two judges on Wednesday and is the latest in a series of damaging accusations against UBS. Last month, the head of the bank's Belgian operation was charged in relation to claims of fiscal fraud. In 2009, UBS agreed to pay $780m for the dropping of tax evasion charges. A similar deal over the French charges was reportedly stymied by government insistence that the investigation continue.
"We have done everything we can to bring this matter to a close. We have also taken significant and broad steps to ensure tax compliance of our clients and will continue to do so. It is not acceptable to us that this has become a highly politicised process," UBS said in a statement.
The move by French investigators comes amid a clampdown on tax evasion by authorities around the world.
This week Credit Suisse said it lost SFr700m (â‚¬576m) in the second quarter of the year after paying a $2.6bn (£1.5bn) fine for tax evasion to the US.
On Monday, the OECD said countries had identified an estimated â‚¬37bn of hidden taxes through voluntary disclosure by more than 500,000 taxpayers in recent years.
