The Polish honorary consul accused of ordering the contract killing of a Monaco property billionaire has retracted his confession to police, saying he did not "understand all the nuances of French".
Wojciech Janowski was named by public prosecutors in Marseille on Friday as the man behind the ambush and assassination of wealthy Hélène Pastor, a friend of the Monaco royal family.
He was said by officials to have admitted having engaged and paid his sports coach to organise the killing of 77-year-old Pastor, the mother of his long-term partner Sylvia Pastor.
On Wednesday lawyers for Janowski, who has been officially put under investigation for the killing, said he wished to deny the charges and had "misunderstood the range of terms used by the police services" questioning him.
Defence lawyer Erick Campana added: "He speaks French, but he doesn't understand all the nuances of our language."
It was also revealed that Janowski, 65, under investigation for complicity to murder, was not allowed either a lawyer or a translator during his 96 hours of police questioning.
Two men, carrying a hunting rifle and a sawn-off shotgun, ambushed Pastor's Lancia Voyager car on 6 May as she left a hospital in Nice where her son Gildo, 47, was recovering from a stroke. After firing twice into the vehicle and checking that both Pastor and her chauffeur of 15 years, Egyptian-born Mohamed Darwish, 64, had been hit, the men ran off.
Darwish died in hospital after four days and Pastor, whose property empire is estimated to be worth up to â‚¬20bn (£15.9bn), died 15 days later. Before succumbing to her injuries, she told police she had no idea who might want her dead.
Marseille public prosecutor Brice Robin outlined in great detail last Friday how meticulous detective work, including the discovery of the alleged hitman's DNA on hotel shower gel, had led police to Janowski.
As well as the Polish businessman, six other people have been charged in relation to the killing. At a hearing on Wednesday, a judge ordered Janowski to continue to be held in custody.
