French police believe they have identified two men who shot and fatally injured a Hélène Pastor was ambushed by a gunman with a sawn-off shotgun in May as she left a hospital where she was visiting her son who had suffered a stroke.
Detectives say her attacker and an accomplice were caught on CCTV and have been identified through mobile phone records and forensic tests on the hotel room in Nice where they are suspected to have stayed at the time of the assassination.
Now officers are examining reported links between the suspected gunman and the dead woman's son-in-law, a Polish consular official based in Monaco and head of the local chamber of commerce.
Pastor, 77, who owned around a third of property in Monaco and was worth an estimated â‚¬19bn (£15bn), was attacked as her Lancia Voyager car pulled out of the Archet hospital in the west of Nice on 6 May.
Mohamed Darwich, 64, her chauffeur, was severely injured and died in hospital a few days later. Pastor, who had connections to the Monaco royal family, died of her injuries two weeks later.
At a press conference on Tuesday, Brice Robin, the prosecutor at Marseille overseeing the inquiry, said the two suspects had travelled to Nice from the Mediterranean port city and did not appear to be experienced professional killers.
He said 23 people were currently being held by police investigating the attack and detectives were examining money transactions from a bank account in the name of Wojciech Janowski, who is married to Pastor's daughter Sylvia and is Poland's honorary consul in Monaco.
In 2010, Cambridge-educated Janowski, 65, was awarded the Legion d'Honneur by the then French president Nicolas Sarkozy for his charitable work. He previously ran a group of hotels and casinos in Monaco, and is now head of a nanotechnology company.
Janowski is being held in police custody along with his wife, though officers say they have not established her involvement in the killing.
"Right now, suspect financial movements have been identified on Mr Janowski's bank accounts, which need to be explained, and we have found links with two intermediaries who were in direct contact with the two suspects," Robin said.
He added that Silvia Pastor was being held "solely for the purposes of the inquiry".
Asked if the murder appeared to be a contract killing, Robin added: "We can think that ... but it's too early to talk of motives. The prosecutors are trying to identify those who ordered this as well as the intermediaries."
