Strikes by performers, actors and technicians are threatening to shut down some of France's leading arts events, including the renowned Avignon festival.
Part-time and temporary workers are angry at plans to reduce their right to extra benefits and social security, aimed at cutting government debt. They say the proposals will hit the country's The industrial action has already led to the cancellation of the Latin American Rio Loco festival in Toulouse, due to open on Wednesday, along with a Paris flamenco event. The Paris-based British singer Jane Birkin has cancelled her 22 June appearance at the Montpellier theatre festival in support of the strikers and performers, who have protested nude during a visit by the culture minister, Aurélie Filippetti, to a culture centre in northern The disgruntled performers and technicians say they will step up their action to hit the big summer festivals, including the Avignon festival in July, which attracts tens of thousands of arts lovers.
At the heart of the dispute is the special status given to more than 254,000 workers in France's film, theatre, television and festival industry. Known as France's official auditors, the Cour des Comptes, says a system in which intermittents contribute â‚¬232m (£185m) in social security payments but claim â‚¬1.26bn in benefits cannot continue. The auditors add that while arts workers account for 3% of France's 10.1% jobless total, their special status creates one third of the â‚¬3.7bn social security's unemployment benefit deficit.
Under a deal reached between unions, employers and the French government in March, the part-time and temporary workers will have to pay higher contributions and wait longer after the end of each temporary period of work before they are entitled to benefits.
The workers threatening to strike say they claim â‚¬320m not â‚¬1.26bn, and say the nature of their jobs means they experience long periods of unemployment for which they should be compensated. One demonstrator at the naked protest in Guise on Tuesday told Filippetti: "We are asking that the agreement be renegotiated because the way it's been done is despicable and senseless."
Jacques Allaire, an actor-director, said France's "It's not only about a fight for rights, but for a model of society. And this betrayal comes from a leftwing government," Allaire told the newspaper Libération.
In a statement, Avignon workers warned: "If the government approves the 22 March agreement, we reserve the possibility to apply our right to strike from 4 July and the government will have to take responsibility for the consequences."
In a letter to Le Monde last month, the director of the Avignon ON festival, Olivier Py, called on the prime minister, Manuel Valls, to order a moratorium on the March agreement and reopen negotiations.
France's Socialist government is trying to reduce the country's social security bill as part of a wider effort to bring public spending and debt to within EU limits.
The last time a French government carried out reforms in this area, in 2003, the Avignon festival was cancelled, for the first time since it was founded in 1947. It is now one of the biggest arts festivals in the world.
The government has appointed a mediator to meet union representatives.
The threat came as the train drivers strike continued for a third day a strike by taxi drivers earlier this week and a warning from Air France that its ground staff were planning industrial action on Sunday over the proposed restructuring of the company.
