Detectives carrying out mass DNA testing at a French lycée to trace a rapist say only one student has refused to give a sample.
The young man, who is over 18, told police he had personal reasons for not giving a sample as part of the police operation at the private Catholic lycée Fénélon-Notre-Dame at La Rochelle.
On Wednesday morning, officers were testing the last of the 475 pupils, 31 teaching staff and 21 other male adults at the secondary school. It is the first time such an operation has been carried out in a French educational establishment.
A handful of tests are expected to take place on Thursday on those minors and adults who were unable to attend before, after which all samples will be sent to two French laboratories for analysis.
Many of those tested were minors and the judge leading the inquiry had required the written authorisation of their parents.
Those tested were all believed to be in the school on 30 September when a 16-year-old girl was raped in the toilets. The assault took place after the lights were turned out and the victim was unable to identify her attacker. However, police found a trace of the rapist's DNA on her clothing.
Public prosecutor Isabelle Pagenelle, who is heading the investigation and had ordered the mass testing, said it was the only way to take the inquiry forward.
Investigators warned that those who refused to be tested could be designated as suspects and would be summoned to the police headquarters, where officers would try to persuade them to comply with the order. If they still refused, officers might seek an order to search their homes.
Pagenelle told journalists that one young man had responded to the summons to be tested at the lycée, but had refused to give a sample. "We noted his refusal and let him leave," she said, adding that the student had not yet been ordered to report to the police station. We will wait for the results of the analysis of the samples taken."She said all negative tests would be destroyed and that the tests had been carried out calmly. A counselling service set up to reassure students had "not been called upon very much", she added.
