François Hollande has finally been allowed to visit his stricken partner in hospital a week after she was admitted following revelations that he was having an affair.
The French president visited Valérie Trierweiler on Thursday evening, according to the Élysée Palace, which is struggling to contain the biggest crisis of Hollande's 20-month presidency.
Trierweiler has been suffering from severe shock and depression after news of Hollande's alleged secret meetings with the actress Julie Gayet hit the headlines last weekend. Earlier reports said the president had sent flowers and chocolates to her but had been banned from seeing her by doctors concerned about her health.
Trierweiler, 48, was admitted to hospital last Friday after Closer magazine published a special edition devoted to Hollande's alleged affair, with pictures apparently showing the French leader on a scooter travelling to meet Gayet at a flat a stone's throw from the Élysée Palace.
Friends told journalists that Trierweiler was "very tired, to the point of not being able to stand" and needed "space to get back on her feet". She was also said to be suffering from low blood pressure.
The alleged affair has done little to improve Hollande's already rock-bottom popularity rating (though it has risen a few percentage points), and it has presented him with considerable problems, not least concerning Trierweiler's status as a de facto first lady with a publicly funded staff and office.
According to the centre-left news magazine Le Nouvel Observateur, Hollande wanted to persuade his partner to sign a joint announcement on their formal separation last weekend.
With a major press conference arranged for a few days later, at which the president was due to announce a number of major political moves, making such a public declaration was seen as the "least worst solution", said the magazine, citing Trierweiler's friends.
However, the centre-right Le Point magazine said Trierweiler had woken last Friday in a state of "deep despair" after Hollande had confessed to the affair in a "cold and implacable" manner, and she had asked to be taken to hospital.
It emerged On Friday that Gayet, who is suing Closer magazine for â‚¬50,000 (£41,000) damages for the original revelations, was forced to ring Gayet's former husband Santiago Amigorena, with whom the actress has two sons, told Europe 1 radio that: "Julie is very calm with all this and very sure of herself because nobody's done anything wrong, nobody's cheated on anyone."
After Hollande dodged questions about the alleged affair with Gayet at the press conference on Tuesday, Closer stepped up the pressure by publishing a second special edition on Friday giving further details of their alleged relationship.
On Friday, Closer said that far from being a fling or a recent romance, the pair had been secretly meeting for more than two years and spent weekends away in the south of France in the picturesque village of Mougins, near Cannes on the Riviera, where the president owns a villa. The pair were also reportedly photographed together at his previous parliamentary constituency town of Tulle in the Corrèze in central France, while Trierweiler was on holiday in Greece waiting for the president to join her.
There were also details of other meetings at a second flat in Paris in a chic arrondissement not far from the Élysée, near where Gayet has a film production company.
The magazine said the actress had introduced the president to her grandmother and other family members, and described the relationship between her and the French leader as an "eventful idyll" that had survived "splits and reconciliations".
Closer also had photographs showing Gayet at a Socialist party meeting where Hollande was confirmed as presidential candidate, sitting just a few rows behind him. Gayet featured in a political campaign video for Hollande, in which she gushed of being "impressed" by him and had, Closer said, "big stars in her eyes".
News of Hollande's visit to Trierweiler's hospital bedside was reported by French radio station, France Inter, the equivalent of Radio 4. It said until then the couple had only communicated by phone and SMS.
The furore took a farcical twist when a lorry driver dumped several tonnes of horse manure outside the Assemblée Nationale, France's lower house of parliament. His lorry bore the words: "Out with Hollande and all politicians." Police had to bring in a digger to clear the manure.
