The French actor at the centre of François Hollande's alleged love triangle is to sue the magazine that revealed her and the French president's supposed secret trysts, it has been reported.
While Hollande, 59, told journalists he would not drag Closer through the courts for breaching his privacy, Julie Gayet, 41, is said to have consulted lawyers with a view to initiating legal proceedings.
Closer published a special edition on Friday, claiming Hollande had been visiting Gayet at a flat a stone's throw from the Elysée Palace, without the knowledge of his partner Valérie Trierweiler.
The magazine also printed a series of photographs of Gayet entering the apartment building, followed some time later by a man it claimed was Hollande arriving on the back of a scooter.
Gayet had already lodged a formal legal complaint last March over rumours circulating on the internet that she was romantically involved with the French president.
At a press conference on Tuesday, Hollande said his indignation at the invasion of privacy was "total" but he would not be taking legal action. Otherwise, he refused to speak of the alleged affair.
Among the French media there was less concern about the president trundling along the boulevards of Paris on a scooter to meet his girlfriend than about his political decision to take what is seen as a sharp turn to the right.
In short, it mattered less that he was allegedly cheating on his partner than that he had become a social democrat (and in any case only the perfidious and prurient "anglo-saxonne" press was interested in the former).
There was hardly a word either about Trierweiler who was packed off to a hospital after learning of her partner's infidelity?, or sidelined for the good of the president amid concerns she could make serious trouble. Nobody knew and nobody asked.
"I am a social democrat", Hollande declared at Tuesday's press conference as if confessing to a self-help group, adding that he would remain one how ever many times the question was asked.
It was not a matter of choice that he was pledging less welfare and tax cuts for businesses, he said, but of necessity; in his own words "a social compromise".
The French papers compared Hollande to Gerhard Schröder, Germany's Social Democratic chancellor from 1998 to 2005, and suggested the president had abandoned socialism and chosen "third way" politics.
Libération's headline, "Hollande Libéré", made a play on the French word "By claiming the 'social democrat' line yesterday, the head of state clarified his political position at the risk of being accused of turning liberal [free market]," Libération wrote.
"Social Democracy: Hollande comes to terms with it", said the inside-page headline. Trierweiler and the president's alleged affair were relegated to a sidebar on page three.
Even the populist Le Parisien, stuck to politics with its headline: "High Voltage. In front of the press the president announced a series of economic and social measures while remaining very discreet about his personal situation that he will clarify later."
The centre-right Le Figaro's front page carried a picture of the president and the words: "A verbal U-turn."
Meanwhile, another U-turn nearly went unnoticed: on Tuesday, the French satirical magazine Le Canard Enchaîné reported that the culture minister, Aurélie Filippetti, had nominated Gayet to be on the prestigious seven-member Villa Médicis jury that decides which budding young artists get to go to the French Académie in Rome.
This, it suggested, belied the notion that the "Hollande affair" was private and nothing to do with politics. "Did François Hollande ask for this nomination? Did Aurélie Filipetti take the initiative?," asked Le Figaro.
By Wednesday morning it was being made clear by French officials that Gayet would not be nominated to the Villa Médicis jury.
Where the president's personal tribulations were mentioned by the French media, it was through the prism of the "anglo-saxonne" press, thus allowing them to report developments while appearing to be above it all.
British and American media were variously described as "ironic", "disconcerted" , "astonished", "electrified" and "grasping at revelations".
"Affaire Gayet: the Anglo-Saxon press is astonished at the prudence of French journalists. British newspapers criticise the 'deference' of the French press, while the Americans are thrown by the respect for their private lives afforded political leaders," wrote Le Figaro.
"The Hollande-Gayet affair electrifies the foreign media," announced Le Monde's political page. Le Parisien said the "willingly impertinent" British press had "waited with delectation for a flurry of questions on the French head of state's relationship with a 41-year-old actor".
Only Le Figaro appeared to notice that the French embassy in London had declared war on "French-bashing".
