"If I could just play again, even just for one minute, I wouldn't fear anything; I could even walk on to the pitch at Old Trafford and not be afraid," he says, as if facing Manchester United fans is the most terrifying prospect he can imagine.
"I hope I can persuade a club president to give me a chance. I know it's mad, but I need a man who's just mad enough to give me a chance, for six months, for a minute. I don't want to end my career like this. It's too sad."
It is less than five days since Belounis returned to France from Qatar, the nation that will host the 2022 World Cup, where he was trapped in a nightmare for nearly two years. The French-Algerian player was unable to leave the Gulf State after his club El Jaish refused to grant him an exit permit. In the end he was given permission to go only after several newspapers, the Guardian included, published an eloquent and emotional appeal for help addressed to legends Zinedine Zidane and Pep Guardiola.
Belounis's experience has thrown the international spotlight on Qatar's kafala sponsorship system, which gives employers control over the movements of foreign workers. On a personal level, it has left the 33-year-old player psychologically "destroyed" and financially ruined.
"I'm a simple boy. I was never a big-name player but football was my dream and I lived it," he told the Guardian. "For 10 years I lived it. In just 30 seconds the club killed that dream. Nobody has the right to do that. Not for nothing and I did nothing wrong. But that's what they did. They killed my dream. It has destroyed me. The club destroyed me."
Belounis moved to Qatar to join El Jaish in 2007 after an unremarkable professional career in lower-league French teams and in Switzerland. He loved it. His wife Johanna joined him and their two daughters, now aged four and two, were born in Qatar. "It was going well, it was a good life and I intended to stay there," the midfielder said.
In 2010 the club offered him a new five-year contract but the following year when El Jaish were promoted to the top division, Qatar Stars League, Belounis says he was called in and told: "You're no longer part of the club."
"I don't know why. I think because they had bigger-name signings. I pointed out I had a contract and they said they'd pay me but they didn't. Then when I took legal action they refused to give me the exit visa. My wife and daughters went back to Paris in the summer and were planning to stay until I could join them, but I wasn't well and I sought solace in alcohol.
"When my wife heard me on the phone she came straight back. I have known her for 18 years and this has made us even more in love but it's been hard on my family. That's the thing that kills me, the suffering of my family, particularly my girls."
He added: "My mother has brought up three boys and still has to look after my younger brother who is handicapped. I used to keep them. Now I find myself at 33 living with my mother and she keeps us. It makes me weep, though I never cry in front of the girls because they are already traumatised by this and they need some stability."
Belounis says he was told he could leave Qatar if he dropped his legal action. He refused and is still suing the club directors, including a member of the ruling Emir's family, for the €120,000 to €150,000 salary he was due for the remaining years of his contract. He is also writing a book about his experience, which he hopes will be published in Britain.
The Qatar Football Association has denied Belounis's claims, saying that it had helped him recover unpaid wages when he played for another club in the country but that he had never lodged a complaint about El Jaish.
Belounis vehemently insists he has no animosity towards Qatar, and is happy "an Arab country" is hosting the World Cup as long as the Gulf State changes the kafala system. As we meet, he is a sad rather than an angry man. "I came late to professional football. I've played since I was a child, but it was when I saw France lift the World Cup, I thought, that's what I want to do as a career. My heroes were Zinedine Zidane and David Beckham," he said.
"I believed I was set up for a comfortable lifetime. Now I have nothing. Whatever happens, I am starting from zero."
For the moment Belounis has reason to be upbeat. Since his return to Europe he has been contacted by several clubs, he says. After London, he goes to Munich and then Rome for more "talks".
"My mother taught us to fight for what we wanted. I fought to become a footballer and it all went wrong. The dream was broken. Now I have to fight again," he said. "I haven't trained for a while because I wasn't in the right mental state but I know, given the chance, I could be back on form in six weeks. I'd be ready for anything.
"Perhaps there is a club president out there who's just a little bit crazy and who will give me that chance. Who knows?"
