Dozens of French police backed up by a helicopter and gendarmes are searching for a gunman who opened fire with a hunting rifle inside the offices of the left-wing newspaper Libération, leaving a staff member seriously injured, and was last seen on the Champs-Élysées.
The man, described by one witness as "serene and determined" caused panic as he criss-crossed the city using public transport and hijacking a private car. Detectives said they were combing the whole of west He strode into the Libération entrance hall at about 10.15am and shot twice before fleeing on foot. He was then seen in the business district of La Défense, firing at the headquarters of France's second-largest bank, Société Génerale.
A motorist whose vehicle was car-jacked by the gunman told police he was "taken hostage" not far from La Defence shortly after shots were fired at the bank. He told detectives he was "threatened and forced to take the armed man in his car". The driver said he dropped the gunman off near the Avenue de Champs-Elysées.The gunman, wearing green trainers, a black cap, black trousers and a sleeveless padded jacket, appeared in front of Philippe Antoine, chief editor at BFMTV. Throwing two cartridges on the ground, he said: "The next time, I won't miss you", and ran off. "It was all over in seconds," Antoine said.
The French interior minister, Manuel Valls, said: "The man is fleeing and poses a real danger. We will do everything we can to catch him."
Baptiste Bouthier, a Libération journalist, told the Guardian: "Apparently he came in and shot at the first person he saw, who happened to be a young photographer's assistant who was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
"At the moment we don't know more than that and the building is surrounded by police. We are all in great shock here."
French papers said police had matched the bullet cases found at Libération with those left at BFMTV, and security camera footage from the TV station and Libération confirmed it was the same man.
A journalist who saw the security video after Friday's attack at BFMTV said: "He held his gun, it was a gun with a long barrel. He was wearing black gloves."
Fabrice Rousselot, editorial director at Libération, said the man had shot twice. "He said nothing. He came in, he shot and he left as he had arrived."
Libération's editor, Nicolas Demorand, said staff were "horrified witnesses" of the drama. "When someone with a gun comes into a newspaper in a democracy, it's very, very serious whatever the mental state of that person.
"If newspapers and media have to become bunkers then there's something wrong in our society," Demorand added.
The 27-year-old victim was said to have been hit in the chest and is in a critical condition in hospital. The French government immediately sent police to the offices of other media organisations in Paris.
A Société Génerale worker, Pierre-Alber Garcias, told French journalists that he was in a group having a cigarette break near the bank's office tower at La Défense when he saw the gunman. "We heard the first explosion and at first we didn't realise it was a gun. Then I turned and 10 metres from me there was a man reloading his gun. Then there was a second shot.
"It's still going round in my head. He was very serene still quite determined. That's what was so shocking. We hid immediately behind a wall. We heard the second shot and stayed hidden. Thirty seconds after the second shot he had gone.
"I didn't feel particularly threatened. We had the impression he was firing into the air. He didn't seem to want to target anyone in particular."
One of the first on the scene at Libération was Lionel (first name only), who works in the newspaper's computer department.
"I arrived at 8am and did some computer maintenance. Shortly after 10am, I was heading towards the goods' lift with one of my colleagues to go for a coffee on the eighth floor," he told the paper.
"We heard two loud bangs coming from the ground floor. At first we thought the lift had a problem, so we came down by the other lift. Arriving , one of our colleagues was making signs to us from the window. In the entrance hall there was blood everywhere, and bullet casings on the ground.
"I began to give the victim first aid, given that I'm a first aider and a volunteer firefighter. I took his pulse and I talked to him, to reassure him, and placed him in the recovery position. The young man remained conscious, but I had to keep him stimulated because he was going to fall asleep.
"I cut his clothes to make a compression. The victim had taken a bullet as big as a thumb shot at point blank range. It had gone in through the back at the level of his left ribs and come out at the level of his left breast. The gunman had opened fire a second time, but the shot had gone into the ceiling.
"When he felt the hit of the bullet, the young man had run towards the car park, then retraced his steps before trying to flee. A colleague from general services had caught him and he collapsed in the middle of the hall.
"After ten to fifteen minutes, the emergency services arrived. I told them what I had done and I left the victim, conscious and aware of where he was."
President François Hollande issued a statement. "The head of state has asked the interior minister to mobilese all means to throw light on the circumstances of what happened and to arrest the person or persons who carried it out."
The prime minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, said the Libération shooting was a "direct attack on one of the pillars of our democracy, the freedom of the press. The government will not allow representatives of the written or broadcast press, whose work is vital to the functioning of our democracy and our republican institutions, be threatened or victims of criminal acts while doing their jobs."
