A formal investigation has been launched over a racist slur made by a French far-right magazine against the country's justice minister.
On the cover of this week's edition, Minute magazine taunted Christiane Taubira with the headline: "Crafty as a monkey, Taubira gets her banana back". It is the third racist attack on Taubira in as many weeks and has provoked outrage and soul searching in A member of the far-right National Front was suspended after comparing Taubira to a monkey in a recent television interview, and during a visit to the city of Angers, the minister faced children waving bananas. One 11-year-old girl shouted: "Monkey, eat your banana".
Until now Taubira, 63, born in French Guyana and named justice minister, one of the highest-ranking jobs in the French Socialist government, after President François Hollande's election victory in May 2012, has refused to take legal action, saying it would be publicity for her attackers.
Minute magazine, which appeared in kiosks on Wednesday, said the front cover was satirical and criticised attempts to ban it as an attack on the freedom of expression. The headline is a play on words: banana can also be used as slang for a broad smile.
Jean-Marc Ayrault, the French prime minister, had asked prosecutors to investigate whether any law had been broken, and the interior minister, Manuel Valls, announced he was examining whether it was legally possible to block the distribution of the magazine.
"We cannot let this pass," Valls said. "This is not just Taubira who has been attacked for her colour. It is the republic, it is France and its values that are under attack."
On Wednesday, French prosecutors announced they had begun to formally investigate Minute for alleged "public insults of a racist nature".
Junior minister Yamina Benguigui, responsible for relations with French-speaking countries, said the abuse was "worthy of the Ku Klux Klan". Benguigui told Nice Matin: "Today it's a verbal lynching, but what will it be tomorrow? I never thought I would hear what I am hearing today."
Racial insults in public are punishable by up to six months in jail and fines of up to â‚¬25,000. The latest circulation figures for Minute date from 2006 when it was selling 40,000 copies a week. The rise in support for the National Front is believed to have boosted readership.
Numerous politicians took to Twitter to demand the prosecution of the magazine's editor and publisher.
The minister for social affairs and health, Marisol Touraine, tweeted: "An abomination from Minute, the newspaper that hates France and incites racial hatred."
