The trial of 27 members of three Roma families accused of forcing their children into lives of crime has opened in the French city of Nancy.
The defendants were charged with ordering the children, most aged 11, to carry out a series of burglaries across The parents, aged between 19 and 55, were said to have educated their children to steal from a young age often "loaning" them to relatives for â‚¬100,000 (£84,000) each. The children were expected to bring in around â‚¬5,000 a month.
Before the trial, one of the defence lawyers said, in an attempt to "explain not to justify", that the community was "operating from the middle ages".
The trial, described by the public prosecutor as "emblematic", comes at a sensitive time in France's relations with the European Roma that have settled on its territory.
The interior minister, Manuel Valls, has been criticised for dismantling illegal Roma camps, and was accused of racism when he suggested two days ago that "only a minority wished to integrate" into French society. Valls added that their way of life was in direct confrontation with those of local populations where illegal camps had been established.
The 27 are members of three extended families from Slavonski Brod in All have denied the charges. If found guilty, they could be jailed for up to 10 years.
Grégory Weil, the prosecutor in charge of the case, said the children were "educated from a very young age uniquely to steal. They have never known any other school than that."
Prosecutors say the families formed a "well-practised pyramid organisation" in which children were put to work at 11. Police with international search warrants discovered the families lived in homes "of high quality, sometimes entirely in marble", and drove luxury cars back in Croatia.
Investigations in Croatia also led police to the suspected head of the crime network, a 66-year-old woman. The woman, who was not named, was arrested under an international warrant in July the day after Croatia joined the EU, and extradited to France. She is expected to be tried separately.
Alain Behr, lawyer for one of the accused, said he was concerned about the Roma getting a fair trial in the current political climate. He said they should be judged for what "they do and not what they are". He said he intended to explain without necessarily justifying the situation of the travelling people who were by and large unable to read and write and led a miserable existence, since the opening of European frontiers.
"We are judging with all the legal tools of the 21-century, behaviour which remains from a community operating from the middle ages," Behr added.
In total 200 gendarmes were mobilised for several months tracking the network leading to a wave of arrests in September 2011 in Alsace and Lorraine.
The trial is expected to last two weeks.
