Two international news agencies are at the centre of a row over self-censorship after withdrawing an unflattering photograph of the French president, François Hollande. Agence France-Presse (AFP) and Reuters were subjected to criticism and widespread ridicule on the internet and social media sites after deciding to pull the picture.
The photograph was taken when Hollande visited a school in Denain in northern It coincided with the start of the new school term for the majority of French schoolchildren. He is pictured sitting in front of a blackboard, on which is written "Aujourd'hui, c'est la rentrée" ("Today it's back to school") with a wide grin and rather gormless facial expression.
The original picture was captioned: "During a visit to Denain Michelet school, September 3 2013, François Hollande smiles chairing a panel discussion on the reform of school timetables established by the government."
Hollande, who sold himself as Monsieur Normal during his presidential election campaign, once had a reputation for being one of the country's wittiest politicians, but has suppressed his humorous side since being elected, for fear of being perceived to lack gravitas.
AFP made the photograph available on its website for use by newspapers and media outlets, but later said it had made an editorial decision to withdraw it. "Please take it off your systems. We are sorry for any inconvenience and thank you for your co-operation," it wrote in place of the caption.
Reuters sent a "picture kill" notice to its clients, asking them not to use the image. The image, however, was quickly picked up and reposted on Twitter and Facebook, where the agencies were accused of bowing to pressure.
AFP insisted it had not come under any pressure from the Elysée palace to withdraw the picture, taken by Denis Charlet, one of AFP's photographers, who shot several other frames in the same series showing Hollande in a more serious pose.
Philippe Massonnet, director of information at AFP, told Le Nouvel Observateur magazine: "AFP was not put under any pressure from the head of state: it was an editorial decision taken by our editorial team in Paris in all independence, after an internal debate," adding: "
"The authorities never ask us to do this kind of thing."
The editorial debate was reportedly sparked by a "little buzz" caused on social media sites.
"It was decided to 'kill' the shot because we decided, in retrospect, that it brought nothing to the series [of images] in terms of information," said Massonnet, who added that the decision to withdraw the photograph was part of the daily photo-editing process. "Choices have to be made. With war photographs, for example, we may decide not to distribute bloody or degrading images.
"Unlike certain media, when we make a mistake, we correct it. We modify our texts and we 'kill' our photographs."
Thomson Reuters in London said it was looking into the issue of the retraction and would respond shortly.
On Facebook, one commentator wrote: "But why? He looks so cute." Another replied: "If you want to drag an unwilling country into a dangerous and very bloody war, you don't want to look CUTE!"
Le Point magazine said the photograph made Hollande look like a clown, while news website Rue89 said the president looked "simple-minded".
