Two Italian women have died after being hit by falling ice that set off an avalanche as they climbed in the Massif de Mont Blanc.
The women were swept into a crevasse and buried in snow in the early hours of the morning. Their guide, also from "The three climbers were buried, engulfed in a crevasse," the local mountain rescue service told journalists.
"It's a section that's well frequented at this time of the year. There were probably around 40 people ascending at the time of the accident."
August is one of the busiest months in the mountains. Mont Blanc is the highest peak in the European range. Alpine rescue teams have reported four deaths on the mountain in the last week, after two French climbers died on the Italian side.
The women, aged 37 and 41, from the Piedmont region in northern Italy, had set off from a mountain lodge at Cosmiques at an altitude of 3,600 metres, at around 2am. They were on a rope with their guide at an altitude of around 4,200 meters on the Mont Blanc de Tacul slope, when the climbing party was hit by falling ice, according to the High Mountain Rescue Gendarmerie (PGHM) at Chamonix.
After reports of the avalanche reached rescuers, a caravan set off by foot from Chamonix at 4am to see if any climbers were missing. At daybreak two helicopters joined the search. By 8am there were up to 30 rescuers at the scene but because snow conditions were extremely unstable, they were only able to operate one at a time, the PGHM said.
"The climbers were with a guide, had gone where they should have gone and had done everything right. The conditions were average, but the avalanche was set off by blocks of ice falling and they can fall at any time," said one local who did not want to be named.
Although there were clear skies on Monday, the rescue service said: "The sector is dangerous because the covering of snow is unstable. We were forced to limit the number of rescuers we sent."
Mont Blanc is the highest summit in the European Union at 4,810 metres. It attracts around 20,000 climbers a year and has the highest fatality rate in In a separate fatal accident on Tuesday morning, two French climbers were found dead in a 20-meter deep crevasse on a glacier in Isère near the winter ski resort of Alpe d'Huez.
The pair, a woman aged 51 from Chambery, and a man also in his 50s were found 3,000 metres up on the glacier in the Écrins range, below the Roche de la Muzelle peak. Local rescuers said they were climbing alone and had set off on Monday. "It appears they fell while making their descent," said a rescuer.
In July last year, nine climbers, three from Britain, were killed, nine were injured and four disappeared after being hit by an avalanche as they attempted to ascend Mont Maudit (Cursed Mountain) in the Mont Blanc range.
