To stroll through the grand faded salons of the Château d'Hérouville is to take a walk through one of the sacred spaces of British pop music.
Elton John was one of the first to record at the imposing French country pile in 1972, pounding his way through refused to sleep in one of the rooms.
Rumour had it that the ghost was that of Frédéric Chopin, who is said to have lived at Hérouville with his mistress, French author George Sand. If so, the composer's ethereal bones would also have been shaken by the sound of Uriah Heep, Canned Heat, Rick Wakeman, Iggy Pop, the Bee Gees, Marvin Gaye, Now, after years of neglect, the chateau, one of the world's first "residential music studios" is for sale. For â‚¬1.29m (£1.12m), the purchaser can buy not just a property, but a soundbite of the history of late-20th-century pop and rock.
The house, a 1740 staging post built in the austere Roman school of architecture, in the Val d'Oise region 30km north of Paris, became famous thanks to its previous owner, the late French musician and film score composer Michel Magne, who won an Oscar in 1962 for his music for the Gene Kelly film When Magne acquired the property in 1962 it was in ruins; today, it has 30 rooms, a swimming pool and tennis court set in 17,000 hectares of parkland.
Magne wanted the chateau, which had been painted by Vincent van Gogh, who is buried nearby, as a home for his family and a personal recording studio. However, word soon spread of its extraordinary acoustic qualities. Seven years later it opened as a residential recording studio, nicknamed Strawberry Studios, and boasting everything that a demanding star could want: state-of-the-art recording equipment, ping-pong tables, mini-football games and a swimming pool.
Two years ago, Magne's second wife, Marie-Claude, toldThe late Jerry Garcia, the band's lead guitarist, told his biographer: "We went over there to do a big festival, a free festival they were gonna have, but the festival was rained out. It flooded. We stayed at this little chateau which is owned by a film score composer.
"We were there with nothing to do: During a three-month stay at the chateau, Fleetwood Mac singer Stevie Nicks requested that her bedroom be painted pink. When Eno claimed to have been awoken early every morning with someone shaking his shoulder. When he opened his eyes, no one was there.
Magne had no head for business and was forced to sell the property to his creditors in 1979. The new owners allowed the recording studio to remain while pursuing plans to convert the chateau into luxury flats. The local authority denied permission and, apart from a brief period of rental, it has been mostly empty for the past 28 years.
As well as the asking price, the property needs at least â‚¬300,000 of renovations, to make it habitable according to the estate agency, Champs Elysées Prestations. Gilles Ditcharry of the company said he has been approached by an Australian musician, who is returning to France in September to visit Hérouville for the second time. "It's not a classically beautiful chateau, as it was built in the austere Roman style, but it has a fantastic history and it's only half an hour from Paris.
"It needs a lot of work, but you can do something superb with it."
