French detectives investigating the murder of a British family at an Alpine beauty spot last year are looking at records of a series of telephone calls made to The frequent calls, to five Romanian numbers, suddenly stopped after Saad al-Hilli, 50, his wife, Iqbal, 47, and her mother, Suhaila al-Allaf, 74, were gunned down near Lake Annecy in the Haute Savoie last September, say police.
Each victim was shot twice in the head, leading investigators to suspect a contract killing. Since then they have also looked at whether the murders could have been carried out by a lone assassin with no connection to the family.
On Monday the Annecy public prosecutor, Eric Maillaud, confirmed that detectives had asked the Romanian authorities to trace the telephone numbers following calls allegedly made to and from the home of Hilli's brother Zaid in the three weeks before the family left for a holiday in "We believe the brother was in contact with Romania and we are looking to identify the calls. We would like to know why he was calling people in Romania," Maillaud told the Guardian."We have made an official request to the Romanians to verify the numbers."
Maillaud said so far they had not been traced, but insisted it was not a "firm lead" into the murders. "We are just leaving no stone unturned," he added.
The prosecutor said he was unable to confirm reports in Le Parisien that Mrs Hilli's sister Fadwa al-Saffar also made calls to Romania from her home in Reading.
The investigation into the shootings has led French detectives, working with British counterparts, to make inquiries in various corners of the world, including Iraq, the former Yugoslavia and Switzerland. Nine months on, however, they are no closer to apprehending the killer or killers.
A passing cyclist, Frenchman Sylvain Mollier, 45, a father-of-three who appeared to have stumbled across the scene, was also murdered.
Police focused on Zaid al-Hilli after family friends told detectives that the two brothers had been engaged in a family inheritance dispute, but Zaid al-Hilli has repeatedly denied any feud.
The Hillis' two daughters were the only survivors of the shooting. The older girl, Zainab, aged seven, was shot in the shoulder and beaten around the head, leaving her with a fractured skull. Her sister, Zeena, four, escaped uninjured after hiding for eight hours in the rear footwell of the family's BMW 5-series estate under the skirt of her dead mother.
The two girls are reportedly in the care of a foster family.
