French police have arrested a 21-year-old man following the stabbing of a soldier in a busy Paris shopping precinct on Saturday.
The suspect was picked up around dawn on Wednesday in a western suburb of Paris and has been placed in custody for 96 hours, the maximum allowed for suspected terrorist attacks.
He is now being questioned about the attack on Private Cédric Cordier, who was approached from behind and stabbed in the neck with a knife or cutter as he patrolled the in the underground mall outside La Défense station.
French officials are investigating links with the killing of British soldier Lee Rigby who was hacked to death in Woolwich, south-east London, last Wednesday, a few days before the attack on Cordier, but say they have no evidence the two incidents are connected.
Cordier, 25, was released from hospital on Monday, and has rejoined his rifle unit where he has been given time off duty, but is said to be "traumatised".
The Frenchman arrested on Wednesday at La Verrière in the Yvelines department was known to investigators but not to the intelligence service, said the French interior minister, Manuel Valls.
"I cannot talk about radical Islam," the minister added. Later, talking on news channel iTélé, Valls confirmed reports that the suspect had "traditional, even radical, Islamic links for the past three or four years", but cautioned against drawing any hasty conclusions.
"We have a certain number of elements that suggest this, but the inquiry has only just begun and we have to respect it. The prosecutor and police think this man is sufficiently dangerous to put this inquiry under the authority of the anti-terrorist prosecutor."
Paris prosecutor François Molins told journalists the suspect "wanted to target a representative of the state". He added that the attacker had stabbed several times with "impressive determination".
In a press conference on Wednesday, Molins added that the suspect had converted to Islam at 18 and had no doubt acted out of religious ideology. The prosecutor said the man was not known to the country's intelligence services, but had been stopped and asked for his identity papers after praying in the street in 2009, and was known to police for petty crimes and violence, for which he had been cautioned but never prosecuted.
Molins said video footage showed the suspected attacker had bought two knives in a hypermarket in the shopping centre before the attack and had prayed shortly before the stabbing.
When police arrested him outside a friend's flat at 6am on Wednesday, Molins said he "indicated to police he knew why they were there". For the moment, investigators are still qualifying the attack as terrorism, he added.
Police said the man, described as "bearded, tall and athletic", was identified from CCTV footage around the shopping concourse and from DNA found on items found in a bag nearby, including a Laguiole knife and an opened bottle of orange juice.
French papers have reported sources close to the inquiry saying the man was seen praying before the attack. However, the same sources said the man, reported to hold strong religious convictions, was not known as a jihadist.
