A British man accused of killing his two children appeared in court in the French city of Lyon on Monday to be formally put under investigation – the equivalent of being charged – for the murders.
The judge ordered Julian Stevenson, 47, to be held in custody after he reportedly admitted to police that he had slit his children's throats during their first unaccompanied custody visit, but did not explain why.
Stevenson was driven into the underground car park beneath the city's main criminal court in an unmarked police Renault Laguna, with a blue blanket over his head. The hearing, where the accusations against him were formally read out, was not open to the press or public. The court had been closed over the bank holiday weekend, but was opened for Stevenson's appearance.
The prosecutor's office told the judge Stevenson's two children, Clara, aged five, and Matthew, aged 10, were killed on Saturday afternoon, while visiting their father's flat in the Saint-Priest suburb of Lyon for their first unaccompanied access visit, at the time they should have been returned to their mother.
She became concerned and alerted the police, who discovered the children's bodies in the three-room second-floor flat.
Stevenson, wearing blood-stained clothes, was reportedly seen fleeing the apartment block on roller skates. He was picked up by police in Lyon a few hours later.
French press reported that he admitted killing the children and had given details of the murders but no motive.
Prosecutors told the court they were not currently charging Stevenson with premeditated murder, but that this could change "in the light of further evidence". A knife which detectives say could be the murder weapon was also found in the flat, which the couple had bought together, but which Stevenson had refused to sell after the bitter separation from his wife.
The couple separated three years ago and investigators reported that Stevenson had a police record for domestic violence.
One of Stevenson's neighbours, named only as Serge, told Metro "I would see him sometimes and his suffering was clear," he said.
Other neighbours reported seeing Stevenson looking calm and relaxed as he walked around the Saint-Priest suburb of Lyon, around three miles from the city centre, with his two children on Saturday morning.
"He was wearing a T-shirt and shorts and the children were smiling and happy. They appeared to be enjoying a day out with their dad. He bought them little presents, including sweets and did not appear to be upset in any way," one neighbour told French journalists. Stevenson will now undergo psychiatric and psychological examinations.
