He was one of Winston Churchill’s last living French secret agents, and one of the most colourful heroes of the second world war. 
Captain Robert “Bob” Maloubier, who died on Monday night aged 92, was an agent in Churchill’s Special Operations Executive (SOE), a secret army created to “set ablaze” occupied Its hand-picked members were tasked with sabotage and spying on the Nazi forces, and Maloubier, then a teenager and trained in weapons and demolitions, carried out several daring missions, including blowing up a power station and a steel plant requisitioned by the Germans.
Maloubier, whose nom-de-guerre was Clothaire, long regretted that the SOE role was largely eclipsed by the resistance in the postwar period.“The influence of the SOE, experts who came over to train the French, has had very little coverage in Maloubier went on to become a founder member of the French equivalent of the US Navy Seals. He joined the French intelligence services and also designed the famous Fifty Fathoms diving watch worn by the celebrated oceanographer Jacques Cousteau. 
Between May 1941 and August 1944 more than 400 Section F SOE agents were dropped into occupied France.
Maloubier had escaped for Tunisia, then Algeria from where he travelled to Britain and spent six months training how to kill, escape and sabotage. He was then dropped into France on two occasions. He wrote several books, including an account of his wartime exploits called Winston Churchill’s Secret Agent, published in 2011. 
In it he described how he and a companion were on their way to pick up equipment and supplies that had been dropped by parachute, when their motorbike was stopped by a German field gendarme in December 1943. His friend ran off, but Maloubier was ordered to drive to the police station with the German riding pillion holding a revolver to his neck. Just as they arrived, he managed to unseat the German, throw the bike at him and run for his life. He was shot several times as he fled, but crossed a field and dived into a frozen ditch to throw the pursuing dogs off his trail before lying low in a field.
“I told myself, you’re dead. Nobody gets shot in the intestines and lung and survives,” he recounted. Nevertheless, at dawn he walked nine miles back home.
A resistance surgeon operated on him in secret and he was flown back to Britain a few weeks later by an SOE “moonlight squadron” bomber. By June, he was back in France. In 2011, Maloubier was one of only three surviving members of Section F. Last year he received an MBE from the Queen during her state visit to Paris before the 70th D-day commemorations.
Maloubier, a familiar figure among war veterans with his perfectly trimmed handlebar moustache, told journalists: “Well, I’ve already lots of medals, but of course I’m very happy.”