A British man has been arrested after his two children were found with their throats cut in The bodies of the children, a girl aged five and her brother, 10, were found on Saturday in their father's second-floor flat at Saint-Priest, a south-eastern suburb of the city.
According to the local newspaper Le Progrès, whose report was confirmed by Lyon police, neighbours saw the man leave his apartment on Saturday afternoon wearing in-line skates.
Neighbours said the man and the children's mother, who is French, divorced two or three years ago and he had taken the separation badly and had a tendency to "drink too much".
The man, 45, had seen his children regularly but in a neutral environment in the presence of teachers.
Sources told Le Progrès this was the first time the father had been allowed to have his children at his home. The children had arrived there on Friday evening and the mother had been due to pick them up at 6pm on Saturday.
However, she became worried and went to a police station on Saturday afternoon to inquire what she should do if there was a problem.
She then went to the flat and found the door locked. When there was no answer and no sounds from within, she called the police, who entered and found the bodies. Reports also said a knife was recovered from the murder scene.
Police immediately launched a manhunt and at about 9pm on Saturday officers arrested the father in the Montplaisir district of Lyon.
A police source said: "We believe the man was looking after the children for the first time since he divorced his wife. He was arrested at the end of yesterday afternoon."
Lyon police told the Guardian the information in Le Progrès was correct but would not comment further.
Ahmed Benguedda, a former neighbour, said the couple had divorced two or three years ago.
The mother, a bookkeeper, had been granted custody of the children and had moved away from Lyon. The father, who was reportedly unemployed, remained in the former family flat and refused to sell it, the neighbour said. "Everyone here is in a state of shock," Benguedda said.
The Foreign Office said on Sunday: "We understand a British national has been arrested in France. We are in touch with the French authorities and await the outcome of their investigation. We stand ready to provide consular assistance."
The man had reportedly been living in France for about 10 years.
