French forces have continued to advance towards the north of Militant fighters were reported to have withdrawn two days ago from the town, occupied since 14 January, after waves of French air strikes forced them to flee.
However, French military officials and locals said the fundamentalists were hiding in forests around the town, where there was said to be "some sympathy" for them. There were reports that Islamist reinforcements were being dispatched to support them.
The confusion came as several African countries responded to calls from Paris for troops to boost the military intervention, codenamed Operation Serval.
"The deployment towards the north of forces of Operation Serval, launched 24 hours ago, is now happening towards the towns of Niono and Sévaré where [troops] have arrived," Lieutenant Colonel Emmanuel Dosser, spokesperson for the French military forces at the Malian capital, Bamako, told AFP.
There are around 2,000 French troops in Mali trying to take back the northern half of the country from Islamists.
The Economic Community of West African States asked the United Nations on Saturday to "immediately furnish the logistical and financial support" for the deployment of an international force. Only a few troops from west African countries have been dispatched so far.
In On the ground, French troops are fighting alongside a Malian army said to be underequipped. On Thursday, militant fighters abandoned Niono, 220 miles north of Bamako, which they had occupied on Monday, after coming under intense bombardment by French planes. French forces are heading to Sévaré, 400 miles north of Bamako, whose airport will allow them to launch bombing raids further north.
Locals were reporting that the jihadists were pulling out of towns and regrouping near Kidal in the mountainous region to the far north of Mali. "They're in the process of fleeing," one local official told journalists. "Everything suggests they're looking to find refuge in the Kidal region, which is difficult to access."
Officials say Mali's army has taken the town of Konna, whose capture by jihadists led to France's intervention 10 days ago.
Islamists who seized a gas facility in the south of Algeria, killing foreign hostages, claimed that the attack was a response to the French intervention in Mali, though a number of analysts doubt this, saying it was clear the Algerian operation had been meticulously planned for some time.
At the weekend a veteran Islamist fighter claimed responsibility on behalf of al-Qaida for the hostage-taking, which ended in bloodshed after the Algerian army attacked the assailants.
According to the Sahara Media website, Mokhtar Belmokhtar said in a video: "We in al-Qaida announce this blessed operation. We are ready to negotiate with the west and the Algerian government provided they stop their bombing of Mali's Muslims."
The one-eyed guerrilla continued: "We had around 40 jihadists, most of them from Muslim countries and some even from the west."
