France's first lady, Valérie Trierweiler, has used diplomatic channels to send presents to a French woman who was jailed for 60 years in Books, beauty products and chocolates were sent to Florence Cassez in jail last week, according to Le Parisien newspaper, which says Trierweiler will send a similar parcel every month until she is freed.
Struggling to find a role in a position that does not formally exist, Trierweiler's choice of worthy cause will find favour in France, where Cassez is widely viewed as a victim of Mexican injustice. Even the opposition will find it hard to criticise her choice; the former president Nicolas Sarkozy's public support of Cassez triggered a diplomatic spat between France and Mexico.
"It's a precious gesture that Florence much appreciated," Jean-Luc Romero, president of Cassez's support committee. "Pressure from the Elysée is important. It shows that Cassez, 37, was sentenced to 60 years in jail in 2009 for taking part in kidnappings, associating with criminals and being in possession of illegal weapon. She has always maintained her innocence.
Cassez was arrested in 2005 with her then boyfriend, Israel Vallarta, head of a notorious kidnapping gang. The long-running legal battle centres on how police handled the arrest and on evidence from kidnap victims who were blindfolded and never saw their captors, but claimed to have recognised Cassez's voice.
Sarkozy made her plight a cause célèbre, regularly telephoning her. But his blistering criticism of the Mexican authorities and decision in 2011 to "dedicate" a joint cultural year to Cassez led to Mexico pulling out of the event and a diplomatic crisis.
His Elysée successor, François Hollande, who has spoken to Cassez' parents by telephone "several times" according to reports, is determined to be more subtle, believing insulting the Mexican legal system will not help free her.
A French diplomat in Mexico said Paris had decided to "go carefully" and let Mexican justice do its work. "Any new attempt at pressure will be very badly seen. We have to treat lightly," the diplomat said.
Romero, who accompanied the French president to Mexico for the meeting of G20 leaders in June, added: "Hollande asked us what was the best way to proceed to avoid anything that might be seen as a provocation. We have learned the lesson."
In March, Mexico's supreme court ruled 3-2 against releasing Cassez, but agreed to study her appeal after admitting her rights had been violated and claims of irregularities in her trial. It is expected to make a final decision whether to uphold or quash Cassez's conviction, or order a retrial, early in 2013.
Cassez's French lawyer, Frank Berton, has called the situation "a massive judicial impasse". In Mexico, where kidnappings by criminal gangs are common, her case elicits little public sympathy and relatives of the kidnap victims have expressed outrage at her "special treatment" and possible release.
Trierweiler's involvement has unfortunate echoes of the former first lady Cécilia Sarkozy's trip to Libya in 2007 to save a group of Bulgarian nurses jailed under Muammar Gaddafi. Nicolas Sarkozy claimed the release was a great success while European Union officials who had been working behind the scenes to secure the nurses' release accused the then French president of taking the credit for their work.
Cassez's family and supporters hope Hollande will raise her case when he receives Mexico's new president Enrique Peña Nieto, who takes up office in December, at the Elysée next week. At the same time, Trierweiler will have lunch with the Mexican first lady, Angélica Rivera.
