Colonel Patrick Touron looked grim-faced, as well he might. His teams of gendarmes had spent three days in a barren, inhospitable Alpine ravine, combing what was left of the Germanwings A320 for human remains.
It was, even by the standards of criminal research, a gruesome job.
The flecks of white on the ground that the first helicopter search-and-rescue teams had seen were not patches of melting snow, as first thought, but debris from the aircraft mingled with human remains.
Once investigators understood that the biggest piece of wreckage was barely the size of a family car, there was a collective realisation that the stretchers would not be necessary. “We do not have a single intact body,” Touron, deputy director of the National Gendarmerie Criminal Research Institute, told the “If you see the wreckage, it’s no surprise that we have not found [whole] bodies, but parts of bodies. We have, at this exact moment in time, about 1,500 body parts.”
There are many more to be collected. The aircraft smashed into the mountain at 435mph, exploding instantly and scattering aircraft and human debris over at least two hectares of precipitous rock.
Since Wednesday, the day after flight 4U9525 crashed into the southern Alps, aerial pictures have shown gendarmes picking through what looked like small pieces of litter.
The French described the painstaking task as the “It was difficult to use ordinary words to describe their grim findings, words that would not cause further distress to already grief-stricken families.
So the gendarmes turned to technical terms and euphemisms. They had found “elements of bodies” and “biological matter”. These were placed in bags and sealed. The bags were winched out by helicopter and delivered to those working in the “postmortem chain”, who extracted DNA and compared it with genetic material obtained from “personal objects”, such as toothbrushes, supplied by the families.
It was purposefully clinical. “I don’t think it’s necessary or helpful to give details,” Touron said.
For the 16 two-man (the searchers are all male) teams, the work is physically exhausting, perilous – several have been struck by falling rocks – and psychologically draining. “It’s difficult because the terrain itself is challenging and dangerous, which makes it tiring and physically hard,” Touron said.
“We have women just as technically competent as the men and we considered using them, but they just don’t have the same physical strength.
“It’s very hard to raise body parts weighing five, 10, 20 kilos, some of which have been buried up to 50cm deep. We discussed it and came to a collective decision. The important thing is for us to be efficient and work quickly to not lose time while the weather is good.”
He added: “The teams are pushing themselves hard. We’re working from early morning to late evening to get the job finished and allow the families to recover what they can.”
Christophe Castaner, a French MP who was one of the first to fly over the crash scene in a helicopter on Tuesday, spoke of the sheer horror of seeing the “debris of men, women, children and babies”. Touron admitted that even for those used to dealing with death, the search had been emotionally charged. “When you have a body to examine, you know what you’re dealing with, but you become technical and get on with it. But the effect is cumulative and exhausting,” he said.
“We’ve had some people join us who are not used to working with body parts and it’s been difficult for them. We have a team of psychologists on hand, and we also make sure we all eat together and speak about what has shocked us.”
Touron added: “The overriding feeling among the teams is of injustice; that these people who didn’t deserve to die were killed intentionally seems so unjust. We cannot do anything for them, so we are making a very big effort for their families.”
