Nathaniel Clyne has been told by Roy Hodgson that the The full-back can still aspire to achieve qualification for Europe’s elite competition with Clyne will enter the final year of his contract at St Mary’s in July and has yet to indicate a desire to extend his stay on the south coast, with Chelsea and Manchester United among the potential suitors.
“I see myself hopefully playing in the Champions League and competing for titles and trophies,” said the Crystal Palace academy graduate, who was speaking at a “I would say [Champions League football] is the next step in my progression. I think I need experience playing European football. We’re doing well with Southampton and hopefully we can get there. That would be great. So I’m just concentrating on Southampton. There are a few more games to play, so I’m just concentrating on getting to the fourth spot.
“City lost on Sunday, and there are still a few games to go and a lot of points to pick up. If we keep on winning and perform how we are performing, and one or two teams on top of us slip up, we can force our way into that top four.”
Clyne’s progress in the top flight with Southampton was rewarded with a first England call-up in the autumn, with the right-back impressive over his four caps by offering defensive nous and energy in attack down the flank. The 24-year-olddeparted the last get-together with praise from Hodgson ringing in his ears.
“He just said: ‘You’ve done ever so well since coming in. It’s like you have been playing international football for a long time. The right-back spot is yours at the moment, if you can continue on,’” said the defender. “He has the belief I will.“He just gave me confidence, really. If I keep on putting in performances and keep on improving as a player, I can hopefully make the position my own and look to make tournaments, and hopefully win tournaments, with England as well. I feel as if I’ve settled in well at that level with the squad so far, but I’m hungry for more.
“The manager has freshened things a bit since the World Cup last summer. You can see that in our performances. We are more pacy, he is bringing a lot of quick players in with youth, and we’re looking a lot more threatening. I’ve had advice, too, from Gary Neville who told me to go out there and be confident. He told me: ‘Play your normal game because that’s what got you the call-up in the first place. Don’t worry about anything. You’re as good as everyone else that’s there.’ He’s just building confidence for me. That was nice and made me feel I deserved to be there.”
Clyne, who was rested for Saturday’s victory over Hull City, has acknowledged the impact made by Koeman on his game this season. “I would say he has improved my game,” he said. “He does individual training with the full-backs and defence, how to receive the ball, where you position yourself on the field, how to create chances for the attackers, and is banging belief into me and the players that we can go out there and be fighting with the best. He’s let me go free and attack, but we’ve remained solid in defence. It’s helped us as you can see in the league. We’re fifth and still pushing for that fourth spot.”
