Another kind of quandary awaits in midfield. Michael Carrick had been imperious against Italy, the “You [the media] made It is on occasions such as this, against better-quality opposition who hog possession and conduct games at their own tempo, where Carrick is needed most. It may be Group E is proving to be a formality against substandard rivals, and even the frenzy of a visit to Dublin to face the Republic of Ireland does not feel quite so daunting given how impressive England were in Glasgow before Christmas. Carrick may not have to be as influential in the six games to come but when England test themselves against Carrick remains an enigma. He is a key performer at United who has only 33 caps, a paltry tally given his talent. Should he play at This could be his time. The 33-year-old will never be the dynamic midfielder who grasps a game by the scruff of the neck as it threatens to veer away, as Steven Gerrard did in his pomp for Liverpool. He is not going to ghost upfield untracked and conjure a decisive goal from nothing to determine a result in the way Frank Lampard did so often. But he is a calming presence, a quality that emits its own kind of authority. In a team crammed with eager, bright young things, and captained by Wayne Rooney, whose own game can be helter-skelter, that reassurance from the centre can be as significant as any strong-arm intervention.
“I felt Michael was the best player on the pitch by a mile,” Rooney said. “He gave us great composure, slowing the game down when we needed to and starting our attacks really well. He’s not underrated by me or by Manchester United fans. He’s a fantastic player and has been a big reason why, at United, we have won so many trophies over the last few years. He was probably more of an easy choice to leave out of the England team when we had big-name players in the squad.”
Those figures have since departed the scene. The easier choice now is to anticipate Carrick starting England’s opening game at Euro 2016, either at the base of a midfield diamond or in the middle of a three. His game does not require a sudden burst of explosive pace, so age should not count against him. If he is fit, he will be as metronomic in his scuttling runs and simple passing as he is now.
He is the natural for that position at the core, even if Hodgson utilised Wilshere there in the autumn. The Arsenal player was neat and tidy enough but his natural instincts are always forward-thinking. The discipline required as the anchorman can shackle a free spirit, and Wilshere offers so much threat as an attacking force. He has his own issues at present, primarily recovering fitness after the latest hiatus to his career through injury, but there was a reserve game in midweek and Hodgson remains in regular contact. Wilshere played the first half of a friendly for an Arsenal XI against Brentford on Tuesday, scoring a goal and setting up another.
“I spoke to Jack at the Arsenal training ground the other day and he was very positive,” Hodgson said. “I think he was planning to play 45 minutes and it was just a question of the irritation he’s been feeling with the wires they put into his ankle, which have been irritating his ligament. He’s pretty confident that with those taken out he’s going to be OK.”
His return will be welcome and offer further options to explore. Yet disposing of Carrick should not be one of them.
