Andros Townsend secured 
The Tottenham Hotspur forward, who was described as a “game-changer” by Roy Hodgson after his cameo here, was summoned from the bench in the second half and thumped in his side’s equaliser from distance 11 minutes from time. The 23-year-old had scored on his England debut against Montenegro in October 2013 to help propel England to the World Cup, only to be ruled out of the tournament through injury.
Townsend has managed only nine Premier League starts for Spurs this season. Merson, now working as a pundit, has been heavily critical of the player’s selection against Lithuania and the The player’s riposte on social media was rapid. “Not bad for a player who should be ‘nowhere near the squad’ ay @PaulMerse” he wrote after returning to the dressing room in Turin. “It’s no secret there was criticism of my call-up, as usual,” said Townsend, who had travelled to Brazil to work as a television pundit after being denied the chance to play in the World Cup. “But every time I put on an England shirt I have done myself justice. It was my third goal in seven caps and it was really important that I really did come on and silence a few critics, so I am pleased with my personal performance.
“I have been thinking about that criticism all week. I have just been desperate to get on the pitch and silence a few critics. As soon as the goal went in, I was thinking of all the people questioning my call-ups and saying I should be nowhere near the England squad.
March 31, 2015
Not bad for a player that should be 'nowhere near the squad' ay @PaulMerse ? 🐸☕️ pic.twitter.com/kQyFcZdY9N
“Hopefully that will keep them quiet for a few months and they can realise the quality I bring to the team. It was a nightmare to be at the World Cup and not play because I was injured. The manager stuck by me through the tough times and every time he has shown me loyalty I have repaid that.”
This was reward for Hodgson’s faith in a player whose role at club level has too often been peripheral. “He’s with us because of the qualities he brings,” said the England manager, having seen his side recover from a poor first half to maintain their unbeaten record since the World Cup.
“He’s got that ability to turn very quickly and run at enormous pace and with skill at defenders, and that’s something defenders don’t like. We’ve always appreciated that quality he has. In a squad of 20-odd players, there should be a place for guys like him because he’s a game-changer.

“You could say the same about Ross Barkley, another potential game-changer who came on and did extremely well despite the fact he’s been criticised for his performances at Everton recently. I’m delighted for the two guys. I’m looking further forward than this match against Hodgson, whose squad remained in Italy after their flight back to England was postponed because of a technical fault on the plane, conceded his side’s first-half performance had been “below recent standards”. His experiment to field Phil Jones at the base of a diamond and Theo Walcott alongside Harry Kane up front failed to work. The team appeared more assured once Michael Carrick had been restored to midfield, with Chris Smalling unable to continue after suffering the effects of a virus.
“The first half was nothing like the performances I’m looking for,” Hodgson said. “We experimented with Phil in the centre of midfield because we feel that, in a destroyer-type role, that could be useful on occasions in the future. But Michael made a difference, as did Ross and Andros. They turned the game. Ross was very brave, and we needed someone to do something a bit special to get level. That’s what Andros did for us.”
