those pink boxing gloves, that left hand, the plummet to the kitchen floor, which apparently looked a lot worse than it was, and the subsequent goal celebration at Old Trafford that poked fun at his own glass jaw. “It’s funny, actually, but my wife went to pick up my lad from school and saw him doing that celebration in the classroom,” he offered through a smile. “No, I’m sure you won’t be seeing that again.”
Rooney has endured another wave of gags about the playful punch-up at his Cheshire home with his former Manchester United team-mate Phil Bardsley over five days preparing for the resumption of his country’s Euro 2016 qualification campaign. However, while impromptu sparring is now off the agenda, the captain has acknowledged a different kind of fight lies ahead. The 29-year-old loiters only a hat-trick shy of equalling Sir Bobby Charlton’s record 49-goal tally for “Throughout my career I’ve never met up with England believing I’m a guaranteed starter, so I work hard in every training session and on the pitch to make sure I keep my place,” he said. “It’s great having Harry Kane come through and Danny and Daniel and Raheem Sterling, who can play up front. It makes me want to work harder because they’re exceptional talents but I’m not coming here to give my place up. I want to play and keep my place, so I’ll work as hard as them, harder than them, to make sure I’m in that team. Without a doubt, it’s the strongest group [of strikers available since he progressed into the senior side]. We’re all doing well fighting for those one or two places available up front.”
The national side suddenly feel blessed with potential up front, given players such as Saido Berahino and Danny Ings were selected in the Under-21s. Rooney’s place in the set-up was never properly threatened but his recent burst of rewards for United, plundered largely once he had benefited from Robin van Persie’s injury to force a return to a forward berth, has been timely. There have been five goals and a missed penalty in his past seven appearances. Hodgson admitted he was “delighted” to see his captain return to his preferred role, and his options revolve around the man who will gain his 102nd cap against There is a certain loyalty to Welbeck, whose 32 caps have yielded 12 goals and whose industry and pace operating off Rooney have compensated admirably for Sturridge’s absence. The manager is expected to play 4-3-3, a system to which he reverted from a diamond at half-time against Slovenia in November when the contest had been goalless. Sterling would operate wide right in the front three, his energy complementing that of Welbeck on the other side. Against relatively limited opponents, the Liverpool player’s pace and ability to dribble through tight spaces may be critical.
The implication was certainly that Kane would have to wait for his chance, the likelier start to follow in Tuesday’s friendly against Italy in Turin when, regrettably, players such as Sterling may have been released back to their clubs. Hodgson said: “It’s a little bit ‘damned if you do, damned if you don’t’. If he starts and it doesn’t go well, we should have been a bit more solicitous and given him a bit more time to find his feet. If we don’t put him in and it doesn’t go so well, we’re guilty of not giving a form player his chance, so that’s a question which has to be resolved. My decision.
“I suppose you have got to learn to deal with these expectations. A full house will be eager to witness the Spurs player’s first appearance. The management will hope the new boy is introduced with the contest long since settled, allowing him to ease himself into life at this level.
