England would appear to be suddenly blessed with striking options, even with Daniel Sturridge’s involvement in serious doubt yet again. Danny Welbeck has contributed five goals in four The temptation will be to field older heads at the heart of the defence, with Gary Cahill likely to be flanked by Phil Jagielka in Friday’s competitive fixture, but this qualifying campaign seems like a prolonged opportunity to blood the next generation. Given John Stones has been retained by the under-21s, Hodgson’s younger options at centre-half are Phil Jones and Chris Smalling, players with 17 and 14 Premier League starts respectively for Manchester United this season. Each has had his moments but Smalling in particular has impressed in their excellent recent wins over Tottenham Hotspur and Liverpool. The former United captain Bryan Robson likened the 25-year-old’s display against Spurs to those of Gary Pallister or Paul McGrath. “Chris is a good defender, and I’ve seen him improve over the last few games,” said the former England’s success in the autumn was built on the diamond, with Arsenal’s now injured Jack Wilshere operating at the base of midfield and effectively learning a new role on the job. The system reaped rewards, particularly with the win in Switzerland, and the presence of Michael Carrick in this squad would offer Hodgson the opportunity to replicate that formation in the two fixtures ahead. Yet operating with the diamond at Wembley might encourage a clogged-up, cluttered midfield when the home side need to stretch visitors whose ambitions will presumably be limited. England will need pace and width, and an eagerness to shift the ball quickly, which might prompt a tweak in the tactics. Carrick’s steadying influence as an anchorman might be better suited to confronting the Jack Butland’s career has seemed to be on hold ever since he swapped Birmingham City for Stoke City a little over two years ago. The 22-year-old goalkeeper has not featured in the Premier League since a 1-0 defeat at Tony Pulis’ Crystal Palace in January 2014, one of only three topflight games in which he has played for Stoke. There have been loan spells at Leeds and Derby in the second tier since, as well as two Capital One Cup ties and three appearances in the FA Cup for his parent club, but Asmir Begovic’s excellence continues to leave him on the periphery at club level.The side where he most “belongs” are arguably the England Under-21s, for whom he has been capped 27 times and invariably impresses. He will presumably be back in their number for the summer’s European Championship but for now would it not be beneficial to play him against Italy to gain a second cap and offer a glimpse of a potential future? With Fraser Forster and Ben Foster injured and absent, Rob Green’s recall seems retrospective. The QPR player’s form has been excellent in a struggling side, but Butland has long been heralded as the team’s future beyond Joe Hart. It would be dispiriting if Hodgson passes up the chance to offer him a game, casting him back to the sidelines where he spends so much of his time at club level.
