Tim Sherwood will not be taking up the vacant position at QPR after talks broke down, with the club’s chairman, The former Tottenham Hotspur manager had been the overwhelming favourite to take the reins at Loftus Road, where his former coach Chris Ramsey is in temporary charge and his assistant last season, Les Ferdinand, was recently appointed director of football.
The three-man shortlist drawn up by the board had been topped by Sherwood with the other contenders, Derby County’s Steve McClaren and the Real Madrid assistant manager, Paul Clement, having since indicated they would not be in contention mid-season.
Yet, while that had appeared to pave the way for Sherwood’s return to top-flight management after his departure from White Hart Lane last summer, negotiations have proved complicated. The 46-year-old had sought assurances over the board’s plans, particularly if The club are preparing for an overhaul of their first-team squad at the end of the season, when a number of senior players will be out of contract and their loanees will leave Loftus Road. Rebuilding in the wake of a fine – or, indeed, a transfer embargo – would be an onerous task. There were apparently issues, too, over personal terms with the relegation-threatened club having offered an incentive-based contract incorporating bonuses dependent on the team’s progress.
Sherwood is understood to have been seeking a more conventional deal in line with those offered to other top-flight managers, plus a bonus for staving off relegation, and guarantees over transfer budgets.
That has left Fernandes looking elsewhere for a replacement for “Think I have got my dream manager,” he wrote. “Not what anyone thinks. Take a while. Still a bit to go but I’m very happy. Press all wrong.” The former Swansea manager Michael Laudrup has emerged as a leading contender though removing him from his contract at the Qatari club, Lekhwiya, may prove problematic.
Whether he would fit the remit also remains to be seen. The club’s key major shareholders – Fernandes, Ruben Emir Gnanalingam and Kamarudin Meranun – had hoped to instigate some much needed long-term planning into QPR’s strategy, developing the academy and eventually bringing young players through into the senior set-up, and aspired to appoint a young head coach who would share that vision.
To that end, Clement might remain an option for the summer, with Ramsey and Kevin Bond, who were in charge of Tuesday’s game at Sunderland, overseeing the team until then, though the indications were that his position had not changed.
The Real assistant is intent on managing in the The inability to secure Sherwood, who would also have represented a long-term option, still represents a surprise not least given Ferdinand, in his new role, is apparently exerting a considerable influence on the appointment process. The club had hoped to have the new man in charge by the time Hull City visit Loftus Road on 21 February, though there remains the prospect it could take longer to secure a replacement for Redknapp.
