The QPR chairman Redknapp’s charges currently languish second bottom in the top flight following promotion last summer and have yet to earn a single point away from Loftus Road in 10 matches. Saturday’s 2-0 home reverse to Manchester United – albeit with some signs of promise en route – condemned them to a sixth match without a win in all competitions but, amid suggestions the axe was close, Fernandes felt compelled to confirm there are no plans for an imminent change of management.
“There’s been a lot of rumours about Harry’s position being under threat, so I thought it was time to end all the speculation so everyone can focus on the challenge ahead,” said the chairman, who appointed Redknapp in November 2012 after a winless start to that campaign under Mark Hughes. “I firmly believe Harry is the best man to get us out of the position we currently find ourselves in. He has great experience and, having spoken to him at length over the last week or so, he is determined to turn this around and help us retain our Premier League status. This is Harry’s squad of players, so he is the man to move us forward.”
Les Ferdinand’s appointment as the club’s head of football operations earlier this season appeared to be paving the way for Tim Sherwood – with whom the former England striker had worked closely at Tottenham Hotspur last term – to return to top-flight management. However, Redknapp will be permitted to add to the squad with loan signings this month as he continues to oversee the team’s bid to retain their Premier League status.
“The performance against Manchester United showed the players are behind him and that they have the stomach for the fight,” added Fernandes. “We know we need to improve our away form and Harry, his coaching staff and the squad will be doing all they can to turn around our fortunes on our travels. It’s very tight in the table and we will do our best to strengthen where we can to give us the best possible chance. The fans have been brilliant all season and all I ask is that they continue to back Harry and the team.”
