The Manchester United and England captain moved level with Gary Lineker as the country’s second-highest scorer with the winner in Sunday’s 3-2 victory over Slovenia. He has scored eight goals in 10 appearances this season to help Roy Hodgson’s youthful side remain unbeaten in the 
Hodgson has pinpointed Rooney’s contribution as a bridge between the younger and older generations and the striker is encouraged by the atmosphere in the squad.
“It’s probably the best dressing room since I’ve been in the international set-up,” the 29-year-old said after earning his 105th cap in Ljubljana. “The difference is there are so many young players together. When I came through I was on my own with a load of senior lads but these lads have all come through together, which helps settle them down when we meet up. Really they are the ones who are taking over the dressing room.
“Myself and Gary Cahill have to take a back seat and let them do what they’re doing and be young lads together. But it’s great to be a part of. Even during the World Cup we were saying this is a young, exciting team, with a lot of energy and ability, and we’ve shown that over the last year. There is a lot of rivalry at club level but, as soon as we meet up with Rooney is effectively the elder statesman of a squad which has lost Ashley Cole, Steven Gerrard and Frank Lampard through retirement over the past year. A veteran of five major tournaments, he has 50 caps more than any other player in the group – James Milner and Joe Hart have 54 and 52 respectively – and has taken the more inexperienced members under his wing when required.
“Wayne has that wonderful ability to mix with every type of group,” Hodgson said. “He is still young and enthusiastic enough to play PlayStation with them if necessary but he can play the senior player with his 48 goals and his experience as Manchester United’s captain. On Sunday he must have been a bit annoyed when he didn’t take a couple of his chances but he kept going and did a good job for the team. He took a nasty whack on the side of the head [from the Slovenia captain Bostjan Cesar] and might have lost his temper in the past but he showed self-discipline and, finally, got us the winning goal.
“I don’t like to put 100% on one man. We have a senior group of players in Wayne, Joe Hart, James Milner and Gary Cahill, and I expect them all to help me, but we are working hard for all the players to take responsibility. They know what their jobs are: Chris Smalling was very dominant at times in Slovenia, talking to the players on the pitch and pushing them up. We will play better teams than them, with more quality, but the result on Sunday was another step on the way to becoming a good team in a year’s time.”

Hodgson will be in the Czech Republic to watch Gareth Southgate’s Under-21s compete in the European Championship over the next few weeks, checking on the progress of players such as Harry Kane and John Stones, who have made an impact with the senior side.
He has been heartened by England’s progress. “I like the pass and move, the runs, the pace and the mobility in the team,” he said. “We are exciting when the ball goes to Andros Townsend, Raheem Sterling, Jack Wilshere. We are inheriting players who have ability and we’re trying to harness that, bottle it up, and will keep believing in it.”
Rooney will surely make the goalscoring record his own in the autumn, when England play San Marino and Switzerland in September, as he hovers one goal shy of Sir Bobby Charlton’s 49-goal haul. “I’m proud to be up there and to be within a goal of equalling Sir Bobby’s record,” he said. “It is something I will look back on at the end of my career and will be extremely proud. Helping the team is the number one priority. If the record comes it will be a proud moment for me and my family but, until it does, the focus is the side.
“The record has stood for 45 years, and many players have tried to beat it. Now to be within a goal of it, at 29 and with a few good years left in me to play … I’m sure it will happen. If I was in my last year or six months I’d be more edgy but I’m not concerned. It will happen at some stage. I hope it doesn’t stand for another 40 years because we have so many talented players coming through. You’re hoping two or three come through and take it really quickly. That would be great.”
