In the end the reality check was not to be endured by the English but by locals who had dared to believe their time had come. It was certainly no way to end a calendar year which has yielded so much encouragement. Conviction did not really course through their challenge until Andy Robertson’s goal made it 2-1 late on. And then it was snuffed out in an instant with the brutal English riposte. The priority remains forcing their way out of Group D to qualify for Euro 2016, a campaign which has started so well and threatens to secure a first appearance at a major finals since 1998. This was all more downbeat, a reminder that further improvement is required.
Many of the qualities Strachan had hoped his side would inflict on The deflation was clear, though it should not be allowed to detract for long from the obvious progress made since Strachan took up the reins. The side’s renaissance over the previous 16 games had stemmed from all-comers buying into a work ethic. These players enjoy each other’s company, feeding off the manager’s positivity. There has been a feelgood factor around the set-up again after recent desperate times and that atmosphere has coaxed qualities from the squad that previous managers have failed to recognise.
“The team has grown a lot over the last 12 months because we believe in ourselves more than we used to,” said the captain, Scott Brown. “I’ve played in Scotland teams in the past when we couldn’t get rid of the ball quickly enough. It was all about launching long balls, defending for our lives and clearing our lines. But we feel more confident about getting on the ball and doing positive things with it.”
At times those qualities went rather forgotten here, so eager were the hosts to recover from a bright English opening. Relatively inexperienced players were perhaps too worked up to impress and, as a result, rather fluffed their lines.
Mulgrew and Brown, the only two members of the starting side with Champions League experience, were off the pace from the outset, rendering Scotland’s defensive midfield shield cumbersome as a result. That placed more pressure on the trio of diminutive, skilful attackers behind the lone forward who had come to personify the upturn in form and belief. Steven Naismith, Shaun Maloney and Ikechi Anya are quick and eager, capable of scuttling upfield on the counterattack at speed. Naismith was outstanding against the Irish, a game illuminated by Maloney’s majestic goal. They would normally close down opponents as eagerly as they sprint up the pitch.
Yet the Scots struggled to liberate that trio into space, the pace of England’s young full-backs forever checking their spring on the break. There were no gaping holes to exploit. Naismith flicked one header high and wide but was generally becalmed, squeezed out by the energy of James Milner and Jack Wilshere. Maloney ballooned an attempt over the bar from one rare glimpse of goal but he cut an increasingly frustrated figure, embroiled in a personal scrap with Danny Welbeck which had sparked early and forever threatened to ignite thereafter. Strachan needed the Wigan playmaker to excel if his team were to make their mark. While he was diminished, Scotland were undermined, their key performers lost in the muddle.
Strachan recognises the shortcomings well enough. They drive his own realism about recent progress. His centre-halves, both Championship players, are not as dominant at this level as the manager would hope. The manner in which Grant Hanley was by-passed by Wilshere’s centre just after the half-hour, for Oxlade-Chamberlain to flick in the visitors’ opening goal, was evidence of that. At the other end there was no cutting edge, with Chris Martin isolated and Steven Fletcher – a potent weapon for Sunderland but a scorer of only one international goal – absent after Friday’s endeavours. Stevie May’s energy alone is not enough to unsettle better-quality defences, and Robertson’s reward was surprising given the flow of the game.
This side will still presumably run up something akin to a cricket score when they resume their qualification campaign against the group’s whipping boys, Gibraltar, in March but they go into the winter break sobered up after recent heady success. This was a disappointment, an untimely reminder that there is much work still to be done. Strachan must try to use that to his advantage.
