The victory over Slovenia on Saturday maintained England’s perfect start to their qualifying campaign for Euro 2016, though a first visit to Glasgow in 15 years will arguably provide a sterner examination of this young team’s progress since the summer’s trauma at the World Cup finals.
Hodgson will hand the West Bromwich Albion striker Saido Berahino a senior debut in the friendly at some stage, with Fraser Forster expected to start in goal following Joe Hart’s release back to Manchester City. Ross Barkley is also likely to feature.
Those youngsters will be tested by a Scotland side who have lost only once in 10 games under Gordon Strachan – and that against the World Cup winners, Germany, in Dortmund – and have been boosted by Friday’s key qualifying success over the Republic of Ireland. “It will be a test,” Hodgson said. “The Scottish fans are exceptional, especially at Celtic Park where they are very good at supporting their team. That is all to the good. That is what we need. But a game like that in Scotland will probably tell me a little bit more about this team.
“We have done all we can do in these first four qualifying games so we are reasonably satisfied with that, but we know there is a long way to go before France 2016. We know there are a lot of stern tests ahead and it starts on Tuesday night and we will learn lessons. I hope the players who get a chance to play will, firstly, be able to stand up to any pressures and the crowd pressure and, secondly, I hope they will learn from it. Any lessons we take from it will only be valuable in the future. We know what we are in for and we know the way we play and we are up for it.”
link to video


Scotland’s frenetic win against Ireland, secured courtesy of Shaun Maloney’s excellent finish amid the frenzy, served notice of what awaits in Glasgow. “From watching the game the other night they were kicking lumps out of each other, weren’t they?” said the squad goalkeeper Ben Foster, who may also benefit from some game-time with “It was a good watch, very high-tempo, and I could feel the atmosphere sitting on my bed watching it. It was almost like they were getting more up for good tackles than they were for good passes. I’m sure we can expect pretty much the same atmosphere and the same sort of game, so it would be a good one to be involved with.”
While Hodgson will offer those not involved against Slovenia time on the pitch at some stage, he may retain a relatively settled lineup from the start with Wayne Rooney and Danny Welbeck expected to begin in attack, and “It’s not going to be very friendly,” Wilshere said. “We’ve got to be ready for that. It’ll be a bit like Arsenal against Tottenham, Liverpool against Manchester United, but we’re used to that as players. We played them at Wembley a year ago [a 3-2 success for England] and it wasn’t the friendliest then so we know what we’re in for. They’ll be a bit more up for it on their home ground so we’ll be ready for it.
“The manager has already given us a speech about England against 