Roy Hodgson’s worst fears over the quality of the playing surface at Wembley stadium appear to have been realised after a member of Slovenia’s backroom staff condemned the turf as “completely ruined”, a factor the visitors hope will count in their favour.
Saturday’s Hodgson had dispatched his assistant, Gary Neville, to inspect conditions and the manager attempted to paint a positive picture of the situation. “It wasn’t as worrying as some of the other reports which have come my way,” he said. “The bottom line is the pitch is the pitch. We’ve prepared to play the game tomorrow. I’ll leave any further discussions until after the game. I will wait and see, but I was encouraged by Gary – who is instinctively a critical person – not coming back damning its condition totally. We’ve been all week preparing for the worst, but let’s see.”
Yet the Hodgson will select Kieran Gibbs at left-back for the fixture having fallen foul of the new Uefa regulations which demand national federations submit their match-day squad the day before a qualifying game, with the governing body rejecting a late request to be able to replace the injured Leighton Baines in the The Everton full-back hurt his hamstring early in the national team’s final training session at St George’s Park and has returned to Merseyside for treatment, effectively leaving Hodgson with a squad of 22 for the Slovenia fixture.
England had already opted to omit Luke Shaw, the third left-back in their original 26-man party, from the trimmed 23-player squad registered with Uefa by the 11am cut-off – a new regulation brought in ahead of this qualification campaign – and a subsequent attempt to have him reinstated in the wake of Baines’s withdrawal was rejected.
“I knew about the rule and, therefore, I gave my squad in before 11am to be sent to Uefa,” explained Hodgson, whose morning training session had been put back by half an hour and therefore started on the deadline. “I was rather hoping that, because it was only 20 minutes after the event and we went straight on to [Uefa], they’d show sympathy for our request.
“But they said the rule is clear. After 11am, when you’ve put 23 names in, you can’t change it. I was going to play Leighton in this game and then send him home, so it is a blow. With Leighton going down, it would have been good for us to have Luke on the bench.”
Baines is the third withdrawal from the current squad, following Michael Carrick (groin) and Andros Townsend (ankle) in returning to his club for treatment. Gibbs, who started against San Marino last month, will start at Wembley in the older man’s stead with Shaw – who has played a limited part in training this week given his own concerns over a groin injury – to earn his fourth cap in Tuesday’s friendly against Scotland at Parkhead.
Southampton’s Nathaniel Clyne will make his debut at right-back after an impressive start to the season at St Mary’s, with Raheem Sterling, a substitute in Estonia last month, fit and fresh enough to start the game. “Raheem has been excellent all week,” added Hodgson.
