Instinct suggests that England are on a hiding to nothing. They confront the joint lowest-ranked team in world football at Wembley on Thursday night, San Marino arriving braced with only two professional players in their ranks and intent merely on avoiding humiliation, with everybody anticipating a thrashing. Anything other than a cricket score will feel insufficient and that expectation brings its own pressures. Yet, while the goals inevitably fly in, This has become an exercise in maintaining standards from that upbeat, encouraging victory in Switzerland last month . The 2-0 success in Basel gave Group E a more comfortable feel, the most awkward hurdle overcome early. The management can now continue the process of fine-tuning the strategy aimed at developing a team to compete more coherently at Euro 2016 than they did at last summer’s World Cup. Confronting San Marino may feel irrelevant. A game against Estonia in Tallinn on Sunday hardly feels onerous. Yet it is possible to chart underlying progress even in a mismatch.
Certain areas will be targeted for evidence of progress. England adopted a diamond midfield in Switzerland to surprise their hosts but the manner in which the players revelled in the formation suggested it was a shape worth revisiting. Jack Wilshere may not be a natural midfield holder but he could sit centrally against the Sammarinese and dictate the rhythm through the speed of his passing well enough. He needs to grow accustomed to that role, after all, witnessing the play from deeper.
Those swashbuckling runs upon which he instinctively embarked against the Swiss should not be exploited by these opponents but it would still provide a lesson in how to dominate from deep. “I thought that system, which we still need to work on and hone, could be really useful for me in the future to get crucial key players on the field together,” explained Hodgson when considering the diamond. This will surely be a far from fraught occasion to continue that tactical experiment.
There are other individuals who must seize an opportunity to impress. Danny Welbeck scored his brace in Basel but will see this match as another chance to stake his claim in the absence of Daniel Sturridge, maintaining club form and the sense he is a player revived by his move from Manchester United to Arsenal. James Milner is set to start, which could have implications for Adam Lallana, who would have hoped to offer a reminder of how he can unlock massed defence.
link to video


The suggestion is that Kieran Gibbs will start at left-back and that Calum Chambers, promoted back from the Under-21s, will play at right-back, which would imply Phil Jagielka, at 32, earning a recall alongside Gary Cahill at centre-half. That feels like a wasted opportunity, if only because Chambers could easily operate in the middle and allow Nathaniel Clyne the chance to become the 60th player capped by Hodgson on the right. Seeing those youngsters may excite a crowd expected to reach around 50,000 as much as the public flogging of lowly opponents.
That audience may grow frustrated if, as in October 2012, it takes England 35 minutes to pierce “I’m looking very much at the movement of our front players and midfielders, which is something we’ve worked on for a long time and continue to work on,” said Hodgson. “And the same level of defensive commitment we showed against Switzerland in terms of winning the ball back quickly and sustaining attacks. I’d be disappointed if the pace of our play dropped enormously just because we’re seeing a lot of the ball. I want us to put pressure on ourselves to keep the tempo up.” The visitors will resist in numbers but with ambition to match their lowly status in the global game.
Their two pros are the underused Rimini defender Mirko Palazzi and the forward Mattia Stefanelli, now of San Marino Calcio. Their long established star performer and captain, Andy Selva, boasts 66 caps but is 38 and has retired from professional club football, his duties with the national set-up now a mixture of playing for the seniors and coaching the youngsters. Aldo Simoncini studies computer science in Italy. Fabio Vitaioli owns a clothes shop. Alex Gasperoni works for an interior design company, and Matteo Vitaioli for a company that prints packaging. Michele Cervellini is a lawyer, and Alessandro Della Valle is a salesman for a ceramics company in San Marino.
Their entire delegation numbers 37, of which 23 are players and four technical staff. They will be cheered on by about 100 supporters in the stadium, most of whom may not remember their only win, against Liechtenstein over 10 years ago. They will not add a second at Wembley. For the hosts, however, this is about maintaining momentum. A standard has been set.
