Nathaniel Clyne, who not that long ago fretted about holding down a first-team place at Crystal Palace in the Championship, has targeted regular involvement in the Having excelled during his club’s impressive start to the Premier League season under their new manager Ronald Koeman, the 23-year-old Southampton full-back is set to make his debut in Thursday’s Euro 2016 qualifier against San Marino at Wembley. John Stones, who played on the right in last month’s victories over Norway and Switzerland, has been ruled out after suffering an ankle injury in Everton’s defeat at Manchester United on Sunday. While Calum Chambers has been restored to the party from the Under-21s as cover, Clyne is the only out-and-out right-back in the 21-man squad in the absence of the injured Glen Johnson and Kyle Walker.
“I was just delighted to get the call-up and decided to phone up everyone I knew,” said Clyne, who moved from Palace to St Mary’s two years ago. “I called my mum first as she has been a big part of my career so far. She was crying on the phone. I am happy and I am proud and will go with England and show that I am capable of wearing the jersey.
“It did come as a surprise to me. I’m still up and coming in the game, and still need to improve. Hopefully this will be another step for me, to play for England, and a chance to improve even more. I know a lot of the players there, people like Jordan Henderson, Raheem Sterling and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain who played with me at the Under-21s. Also I know Rickie Lambert and Adam Lallana from Clyne had made his Palace debut in the second tier as a 17-year-old and rapidly became a regular at the club, whose academy he had joined in his early teens. There had been some self-doubt in those early years, a reality reflected by his former team-mate Kieron Cadogan’s tweet last Thursday once confirmation had come through of the 23-year-old’s elevation to the seniors. “Used to drive this guy training and he would complain that he doubts he’ll get in the 1st team at Palace … Now look at him,” wrote Cadogan, a winger who left Palace in 2012 and, after spells with Aldershot and Barnet, now plays in Sweden at GAIS.
“That’s definitely right,” acknowledged Clyne. “I have been on a long journey. I was fortunate to get into the Palace team eventually and, when I did, I made my mark and got through and now I am playing for Southampton and doing really well. The new manager has given me confidence. He says I can be one of the best right-backs in the Premier League. I have grown up, but I feel that I am good enough to be part of the England team. Now I have to show that.”
