England’s travelling support made their own views on the current political situation clear in Basel’s St Jakob Park on Monday evening, reminding the world of the footballing rivalry between the teams. Yet the fixture in Glasgow has been afforded normal Category A status by the Scottish Football Association as the game’s respective governing bodies north and south of the border are confident that the match will pass without trouble off the pitch and with no necessity to draft extra security into place.
Yet Hodgson is convinced his side will be severely examined by Gordon Strachan’s resurgent Scotland side, who so tested Germany in Dortmund in their opening Euro 2016 qualifier on Sunday. “Taking the independence [vote] out of it completely, that’s going to be a very, very spiky game,” said the England manager. “It’s going to be a game that’s feisty.We’re going to be in an atmosphere which many of these players won’t have been in before.
“So I’m looking forward to that game because it will be another massive test for us, so different from playing Estonia away or Slovenia at home. I know our Premier League arenas are sold out and that the atmospheres are very good but Celtic Park when The FA points to the lack of any notable security incidents off the pitch when England have hosted the Scots, the Republic of Ireland and Poland recently as reason to be confident there will be no trouble in Glasgow. “We are working closely with our colleagues at the Scottish FA and are taking all usual security precautions,” said the managing director of Club England, Adrian Bevington. “We were pleased that the Wembley fixture in August 2013 passed peacefully with over 20,000 Scotland fans adding to the occasion and atmosphere of respectful rivalry.
“Over the last decade we have been proud of our official travelling support and the improvement in behaviour, which has resulted in no arrests at any of the last four major tournaments. The England Supporters’ Travel Club requires all members to have background checks and anyone in our official allocation will be ticketed through us. We will work with the authorities in both Scotland and 