“I didn’t think he had a bad game,” interjected Henderson, drawing the questioner’s gaze and grabbing back the initiative. “I thought he did well: a 19-year-old playing in the World Cup, on the biggest stage. I thought he was our best player in the first game against Italy. And, against Uruguay, when he got the ball he tried to be positive, to take players on and get crosses in. In both games I thought he was outstanding.” There was a spikiness to the response, his attitude almost that of a minder. Though the conversation moved on swiftly thereafter, the exchange had proved revealing.
England’s first squad since the anticlimax of Brazil are in need of new leaders, the captain and vice-captain, Steven Gerrard and Frank Lampard, having retired. Wayne Rooney will captain them in in Wednesday’s friendly against Norway, and players such as Joe Hart and Gary Cahill will attempt to offer reassurance at the back. Such is the national side’s state of flux in central midfield, however, that the Football Association was still waiting to add photographs of the uncapped Fabian Delph and Jack Colback to its website on Monday. In that context, Henderson is a senior in waiting. The Liverpool midfielder, after only 13 caps, is someone on whom this team must learn to rely.
Roy Hodgson is still searching for a way to coax out the same dynamism the 24-year-old supplies for Liverpool so consistently these days, the kind that so eclipsed Tottenham Hotspur’s muddled midfield on Sunday and will earn him the vice-captain’s role at Anfield following Daniel Agger’s return to Brondby. Yet Henderson is displaying maturity on and off the pitch. If his club form has been eye-catching, his performance with the media, speaking eloquently on the recovery from Brazil and authoritatively on what must happen next, was arguably as impressive. He has learned from Gerrard, eagerly accepting the added responsibility that will now come his way.
He had begun with something akin to an apology for that worst World Cup campaign since 1958. “There is no hiding away from the fact we, as players, should have done a lot better,” Henderson said. “There is no getting away from that. I’ve had people coming up to me saying we were a bit unlucky, and that we played some decent stuff, but we were beaten in those first two games and came home with the worst record for years. So we understand we let everybody down, not only ourselves but also the fans who travelled halfway round the world to watch us. I don’t think we’ll ever forget that feeling after the Uruguay game, that sheer disappointment. You keep that pain through your career. It drives you on to do better.
“But now we have to show we deserve to be in the The task for Hodgson, to be implemented by his players, is to generate the same upbeat tempo and aggression in and out of possession that Henderson and his Liverpool teammates achieve so regularly. Sterling, becalmed in his media duties until warming to Brendan Rodgers’ reference that he had dribbled like Ricky Villa and finished like Ricky Gervais at White Hart Lane, will be key to dismantling international opponents for some time to come. But he will need the industry and eagerness of Henderson and others at his back if this team are to thrive.
“People have to fear England and not want to play us,” added Henderson. “The only way of doing that is to play at a high tempo and win games.” That process begins against Norway and, on Monday, in Switzerland in England’s first Euro 2016 qualifier.
