Arjen Robben has insisted he was merely being honest by admitting he had gone to ground too easily in an incident during the first half of Holland’s The Bayern Munich player had won a decisive penalty in added time at the end of the last-16 tie, scored by Klaas-Jan Huntelaar to complete a dramatic turnaround and earn a quarter-final against Costa Rica, with That admission of a dive, albeit in an incident that had not affected the result of the game, had potentially left him open to a Fifa charge but the governing body confirmed it would take retrospective action only over “serious infringements” of fair-play rules. Diving would carry only a yellow-card sanction.
“It’s a shame because, yesterday, in an interview after the game I was very honest,” said Robben. “Maybe sometimes you are punished for honesty. But I prefer to be honest. I said there was one foul in the first half where I went to the ground because I thought [the opponent] was going to tackle me, but he took his leg away at the last moment and I went to ground without a touch.
“It was a stupid action from me but it had no influence on the game. In the first half we should have had a penalty and the one at the end was a clear foul and a penalty. That should be the end of the discussion. I like to be honest. I apologise for this action in the first half but this is football.
“It had nothing to do with the result of the game. So I apologise for one stupid action but it didn’t have an influence in the game. We had two clear penalties, one given. That was it. Now we should move on.”
Fifa, in a statement, opted to remind all participants of the need to maintain the spirit of fair play in the wake of the Robben incident. “Simulation is not something we want to see on the field of play but the referees are trained to identify these simulations and punish them by showing yellow cards,” said Delia Fischer, Fifa’s head of media in Rio de Janeiro.
Robben, asked whether he had been concerned that there might be a sanction imposed by Fifa, said: “Afraid? No, not at all. Why? No. I’m an honest guy. It had no influence on the game. It was a deserved win and we’re very happy.”
The former Chelsea and Real Madrid forward has been in startling form in Brazil, his searing run beyond Sergio Ramos in Holland’s 5-1 opening group win over the defending champions, Spain, having set an upbeat tone which has since been maintained. “I’m getting older and, sometimes, that means your game goes down, but I feel better and better,” he said.
“Physically, I’m feeling well. Maybe it’s because I’ve been fit for a longer period now, 100% fit, and I could continue this form at the World Cup. I’m enjoying my game. I have the strength, I have the power, to get away from my opponents. I feel well. I’m enjoying the World Cup at the moment.”
Costa Rica, winners of a group also comprised of three former winners in Uruguay, Italy and England, await “We have a chance [of winning the World Cup]. We are in the last eight and doing well. We have a lot of confidence at the moment in the team. It was a big loss losing Nigel de Jong to injury yesterday but our strength at this World Cup has been that every player who has come off the bench has had a big influence on the game. Everyone is very sharp and can come in and take a place.”
