His partnership with Steven Gerrard had been reconvened for a little over a quarter of an hour as if for old time’s sake, a reminder of a bygone era offered up amid glimpses of England’s future. In some ways it was appropriate this contest should fizzle out just as the veterans’ brushes with this tournament did. This was all so horribly low key, with the And to think the midfielder had even joked, back in Miami, that he would probably hang his boots up “if we go and win the World Cup”. Even if that had been said with a smirk, there has been little call for good humour over the past fortnight. The 36-year-old will take his time, like Gerrard, before determining whether he will still be available for his country once he starts next season at a new club but this was surely the end of a 106-cap career.
He had captained the side for the eighth time and merited praise for his tidy display in Belo Horizonte, even if he will still look back with little fondness on this tournament. His 10th appearance at the His presence in this line-up had prompted some debate. Roy Hodgson had selected, at an average age of 25 years and 300 days, the second youngest side This seemed like a reward for longevity, particularly as he had been denied a period in the Wembley send-off against Peru. It was a sentimental thanks for long service.
But Lampard did at least have a critical role to play within this revamped system and line-up. England appeared more comfortable with their three-man midfield, the energy of Jack Wilshere and Ross Barkley buzzing in front of his reassuring presence. With hindsight Roy Hodgson might have considered this a better way of undermining Italy’s dominance of the centre up in Manaus, with more bodies capable of snuffing out the threats of Daniele De Rossi and the tormentor in chief, Andrea Pirlo. There was certainly balance in evidence with the youngsters aware that Lampard was forever at their back, patrolling that area just in front of the defence. They could try riskier options – not that they always did – in the knowledge their midfield shield could tidy up if the audacious failed to pay off.
The captain was more an interceptor than a feverish tackler, shuttling across the turf and directing those further up-field. He stole the ball neatly, breaking up Costa Rica forays forward, and distributing calmly enough. No other player on the pitch could match his 59 passes – albeit most were short lay-offs to nearby team-mates – and occasionally he spied opportunities to liberate Daniel Sturridge with longer, arced deliveries which threatened reward.
He did not dominate. Only Yeltsin Tejeda and Barkley ran more than his 10.85km as he jogged through this contest. All that dynamism of his youth, when he would tear from box to box and time those runs so expertly, had inevitably dimmed. He simply looked comfortable, at ease and generally unflustered.
What emotion he displayed was spent geeing up those around him, applauding Barkley’s dribble and ambitious attempt, or Luke Shaw’s energy down the left.
This young team, so dispirited by their fate in these finals, probably needed his older head just to remind all concerned that the low-key occasion was still technically classed as a competitive World Cup fixture.
“The fans expect more but they have followed us and are an absolute credit,” Lampard added on the sidelines. “As for me I don’t know about my future. I’m 36 and I love playing for my country. It’s too soon to say.” It may be he never formally retires but the phonecalls from the Football Association simply cease. His was an illustrious international career. It probably deserved better than to peter out in such a meaningless occasion.
