After all, there may be some counselling services to offer once home. “I’ll happily talk to the boys and let them know that, at a young age, you have to take things on the chin,” he said, when asked about the anticipated reaction to elimination and how it may affect the juniors in this squad.
“You have to develop a thick skin really quickly in this world we live in. I would happily speak to them and tell them that, if they get negative stuff next season, it quickly fizzles out as long as they apply themselves and play well. That’s football. It goes in phases.”
Privately, Lampard might concede his own cycle with this team is drawing to a close with these changing times. As of next week the veteran, who will lead out his country for an eighth time, will be club-less, Chelsea’s record goalscorer cast adrift after 13 years at Stamford Bridge. A prospective move to New York City, and possibly a short-term domestic deal to maintain fitness, will be discussed on the national team’s return.
His tenure with The Yet his tournament degenerated into a succession of wildly inaccurate attempts to score from distance and, in the shoot-out defeat to Portugal in the quarter-final, one of only three penalties he missed in 15 years as an England player.
Then there was South Africa in 2010 and the infamous “goal” thumped on to the bar and scrambled from behind the line by Manuel Neuer. England should have equalised. Instead, they crumbled amid a sense of injustice, ending humiliated and eliminated.
The midfielder had played every minute of those two campaigns and yet his only real impact on the finals will remain Fifa’s adoption of goalline technology to avoid a repeat of that oversight by the officials in Bloemfontein. That will forever be his World Cup legacy.
“I don’t think so much about that game any more, though I did a lot at the time,” he said. “At least it changed the game for the better. But it was a positive move for this tournament as a whole, if not for England, that goalline technology was then adopted.
“But, if I’m honest, I can’t reflect on my England career with any real sense of disappointment. I couldn’t have envisaged playing even one game for my country when I was a kid, let alone 100 or more.”
Lampard’s role has been peripheral in Brazil, limited to the quiet cajoling of younger players in training and around the team hotel, and a speech delivered to the squad back in Rio de Janeiro after the loss against Italy when he sought to draw a line under all memories of Manaus.
Despite the best efforts of captain and vice-captain, those words counted for little, though his will be another rallying cry of sorts against the group leaders. “This is a good test of character because it’s been such a tough few days,” he said. “We came here to do better than it’s turned out, so now we have to show we’re men.
“I’ve listened to Wayne [Rooney], Steven and Joe Hart all say how disappointed we are, but as grown men we have to move on. This is about showing the pride to wear an England shirt. It would be easy to roll over and just say it hasn’t been our tournament, to go home with three defeats.
“But if we can take anything from this tournament it’s been the progression behind the scenes and, hopefully, a win tomorrow. I don’t know the feeling back home exactly, but there was a lot of negative stuff – personally after Germany and after South Africa as a group – but I think people see the direction we’re going in now. People may forgive some of the younger boys who have had fantastic seasons and shown glimpses of what they can do.”
This, he added, was “not the time” to discuss retirement. Lampard is merely intent on departing Brazil on a high of sorts.
