Roy Hodgson has urged Neville has played a hands-on role over the past month, from Portugal to Florida to Rio, and his influence within the Neville’s influence and standing in the game makes him a candidate to succeed Hodgson post-Euro 2016, though a lack of managerial experience might count against him. “The first thing I’d say to him is don’t be in too much of a rush to do anything,” said Hodgson when asked whether he would encourage Neville to cut back his punditry duties and seek a full-time coaching role. “Having a long career in football gets harder and harder. The number of jobs available vis-a-vis the amount of time people spend in those jobs gets less and less, so I certainly wouldn’t advise him necessarily to jump at the first opportunity to do coaching or management.
“The longer he can combine the two roles the better. He’s learning a lot in the environment with us, working with more experienced coaches and top players, and that’s beneficial to him. He’s doing a very good job on the television. So my advice would be to keep it going for as long as he feels he wants to keep it going. I don’t have any doubt in my mind that he will become a top-class coach and a top-class manager. It’s just a question of when he decides to leave the punditry behind and go in to the job of working with players. He likes working with players and he’s good at it.”
Hodgson was asked whether Neville, who was capped 85 times over a 12-year England career, has the attributes required to take on the manager’s role. “That’s a bit unfair to suggest,” he said. “Of course he can be. Anyone can be an England manager. We’ve had that before. It’s not necessarily a role that has anything other than the FA deciding, has this man got the qualities we are looking for, or not? That’s what an England manager is. But it would be wrong to start putting him under pressure to suggest ‘you need to get down to some work in a club side because the England manager’s job is there waiting for you’. Who knows? When the job comes up again, who knows what candidates there will be?”
