Raheem Sterling’s chances of starting England’s opening game at the The Liverpool winger was dismissed against Ecuador for a tackle on Antonio Valencia that was acknowledged as “reckless” by Roy Hodgson. While the sending-off will not carry a ban into the tournament proper, the teenager is ineligible for the game against “He was absolutely gutted to be sent off, as were we, but he doesn’t seem to have taken it to heart,” said Hodgson after the team’s session at Barry University on Friday. “The most important thing is he’s still making me aware he’s a player who can inflict an awful lot of damage on the opposition.
“His reaction to the red card has been excellent: he was unstoppable at times in training, some of the things he did out there were breathtaking and he’s not going to lose any fitness. The dilemma I have is that I have more than 11 players capable of taking the field against Italy but I don’t need to see a performance from Raheem on the field to know he’s capable of playing in the Italy game if selected.
“He is an exceptional talent – along with our other exceptional talents – and what happened on Wednesday wouldn’t stop me. We’ve spoken about it. It happened. The blow is he can’t play against Honduras when I’d like to have seen him play.
“But I don’t think it was an ‘ill-disciplined act’. It was over-exuberant and slightly reckless. It was his desire to help us out of a difficult situation, using his incredible pace to track back and stop Antonio Valencia. It was a reckless challenge and the referee was entitled to send him off. That was a blow to my plans but it doesn’t affect his chances of playing when the tournament starts.”
Hodgson: I don't have England's World Cup starting XI in my head


Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, who was arguably England’s most impressive performer against Ecuador, was at the Barry University campus continuing his rehabilitation from the medial knee ligament injury sustained in a clumsy challenge by Carlos Gruezo. The strain will keep him out for two weeks and “We won’t make a decision on him before we go to Brazil,” confirmed Hodgson. “It will be at the very, very last moment which, by my understanding, is 24 hours before we play our first game.
“But the physios are working very hard with him, so let’s hope that it’s not that serious and it won’t even be a question of him leaving us. Obviously it was a major blow because he had been playing so well and to see him having such a dominant effect on the game excited us all. But his mood is good. We’re very anxious to keep him here.
“I’ll have to listen to the doctors and see what he’s likely to miss and when he’s likely to be fit but I won’t be dashing out [and calling someone else up] just because he might not be fit for the first game. We’re entitled to think we may go on further than that. We’d want people like him around. I’ll be accepting with what the doctors tell me.
“They’ll tell me their prognosis and then we’ll make a decision. Stones and Flanagan will go home as planned. Flanagan has friends staying here in America and Stones will go home but I’ll alert them that, if the worst happens, I’ll probably bring one of them back. They’re both fit men in top physical condition but the chances, I hope, are very slim because we want to keep Alex with us.”
Hodgson will grant game-time to the seven players who were not in the match-day squad for the 2-2 draw with Ecuador. The England management will request drinks’ breaks during the match like those which will be adopted in Manaus later this month. Steven Gerrard, who had been suffering from a tight groin in midweek, will start and, as he confronts his third World Cup, has been encouraged by the strength in depth in this squad.
“There are two players pushing in every position to get into the XI and not much between them in every position,” said the captain. “The manager could pick five teams for the Italy game and you wouldn’t see a big difference in the standard. That’s what gives me hope.
“The youngsters have brought their form from their clubs into the England set-up. That’s what I’ve noticed. Hopefully they can continue that into the tournament.
“They’re ready to play and that’s the biggest compliment I can give them.”
