Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain is optimistic he will be able to accompany England to the The winger was injured in a second-half clash with Ecuador’s Carlos Gruezo during the teams’ 2-2 draw at Sun Life Stadium on Wednesday. Oxlade-Chamberlain, who was making his first appearance since 20 April after his involvement in the run-in to the domestic campaign was hampered by a groin complaint, had been one of England’s best performers but departed the stadium in clear discomfort and underwent a scan on Thursday morning.
It is understood the results suggested he had strained the medial ligaments in the joint, rather than torn them, which would have constituted a far more serious problem, meaning the Arsenal midfielder still has a realistic chance of featuring in the tournament proper. The 20-year-old watched training at the Barry University campus with his knee in a brace and hopes to stay with the squad. There is no indication as yet that he is to be sent home to continue his treatment back at Arsenal.
Roy Hodgson will take his time before making a decision over his participation. The Both have featured in the friendlies, with Stones having played as a substitute against both Peru and Ecuador and Flanagan a late replacement on Wednesday. They were due to return home on Sunday when the 23-man party departs for Brazil, though it remains to be seen whether Hodgson asks one or both to remain with his travelling squad and journey instead to Rio de Janeiro. Certainly Stones could operate across the back-line and might free James Milner to concentrate solely on midfield duties having stepped in as a back-up right-back on Wednesday.
The other midfielders on Hodgson’s original 30-man squad list were Michael Carrick and Tom Cleverley, though neither has undertaken the training regime. They would not constitute a like-for-like replacement for Oxlade-Chamberlain, and the England manager may potentially consider Norwich’s Nathan Redmond, so impressive for the Under-20s at the recent Toulon tournament but uncapped at senior level.
