Phil Jones has insisted England’s challenge at the World Cup will not be undermined by ill-discipline despite Raheem Sterling’s dismissal during Wednesday’s penultimate friendly against Ecuador.
Sterling, a second-half substitute, was sent off 14 minutes after his introduction for a foul on Antonio Valencia, whose furious reaction led to the Manchester United man also being dismissed. Sterling’s red card will deny the 19-year-old winger a last opportunity to impress Roy Hodgson before the tournament as he will be suspended for Saturday’s friendly against Honduras and is likely to see his role at the finals initially restricted to cameos from the bench.
Yet Jones echoed his team-mates by describing the decision to send off the Liverpool player as overly severe. “The referee was a bit harsh,” Jones said of Jair Marrufo. “I don’t think Raheem’s done too much wrong. It’s harsh. The referee probably could’ve kept them both on the pitch. You’ve got to deal with whatever gets thrown in your face and everyone’s discipline is key but I don’t think there was anything to worry about. We’ve talked about a lot of things over the last few weeks: there’s no right and wrong, and people will pick up cards because it’s the nature of the game. But I don’t think there was any maliciousness in this incident.
“It was just harsh. Overall it was a fair game and evenly contested. We’re happy to have another work-out under our belts and more acclimatisation to the heat. It was a good work-out and a good test against a good team. They tested us at times and I thought we coped with it well. We could have scored a few more goals but, overall, we’re pleased. It was difficult at times in the heat but that’s what we wanted and that’s what we expected. The preparation is for 14 June.”
Jones, who gained his 10th cap and played alongside his Manchester United club-mate Chris Smalling in central defence, has recovered fully from the shoulder injury sustained in Manchester United’s victory against Hull City last month. Indeed, Roy Hodgson was moved to cite his display against Ecuador – along with those of Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Jack Wilshere – as particularly impressive. “The shoulder feels good,” Jones added. “It was a test to come through it and I’ve come through it fine. They had some big units out there. They’re no mugs, Ecuador. It was a good test and I’m positive.”
