Ben Foster has described Raheem Sterling's red card against Ecuador as “harsh” but insisted the teenager's dismissal should not detract from the positives gleaned from England's penultimate warm-up fixture ahead of the World Cup.
Sterling became the 13That will constitute a blow for his chances of featuring from the start in Brazil, denying him a final opportunity to impress Roy Hodgson. “I'm surprised all round,” said Foster, a former team-mate of Valencia's at Old Trafford. “I didn't think it was a red card for Raheem and I played for a few years with Antonio and he's not that kind of guy. It was a surprise. Thankfully, Raheem only misses the friendly, so we’re fortunate but it was a harsh one.”
Valencia apologised for his reaction, which prompted a melee between the players on the touchline before the local referee, Jair Marrufo, stepped in to intervene. “I am sorry for the fight with Sterling,” said Valencia. “I apologised to the team after the match and the coach. But when he tackled me I thought about Segundo Castillo. He nearly missed the England play Italy in their opening Group D fixture in Manaus on 14 June and Foster, who started his first game for his country in four years, believes the management will have drawn encouragement from the match with the South Americans. “The manager was satisfied,” said the goalkeeper, who watched Wayne Rooney equalise and Rickie Lambert register after the interval. “It was more about the workout really. We wanted some good individual performances and we got them. 
“We got a good goal from Wayne as well. That’s what Wayne does. He scores us goals, simple as that. Some of the other lads put a good shift in. It was a good workout. It would have been nice to get a win but a draw is not too bad. And for me, personally, it was great to play for England again. It was my first game for a year or so. If you can’t enjoy games like that, playing for England, just before the World Cup, there’s something wrong. I had a fantastic time and really enjoyed it. 
