Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain’s hopes of representing England at the Oxlade-Chamberlain, making his first appearance since 20 April after his involvement in the run-in to the domestic campaign was hampered by a groin complaint, and one of England’s best performers here in Miami, was injured in a second-half tackle with Carlos Gruezo and limped gingerly from the turf for treatment.
He departed the stadium in clear discomfort and will undergo a scan on Thursday to ascertain the extent of the damage. If the medical assessments rule him out, Jack Wilshere and Luke Shaw suffered cramp in the 2-2 draw, which saw Raheem Sterling and Ecuador’s Antonio Valencia sent off 11 minutes from time, though it is Oxlade-Chamberlain who remains the concern. “He is the one that bothers,” Hodgson said. “His knee buckled under the challenge as the player turned into him. He’ll have a scan tomorrow, I’d imagine. When we’ve had the scan, we’ll know more.
“When I have to cross that bridge, I’ll do that. At the moment I don’t know the extent of the injury. I’ll have to wait before making any other comment.” Asked if any potential call-up would come from the original 30-man squad, he added: “You’re asking questions I hope I will not need to answer. My hope is that Oxlade-Chamberlain will not be seriously injured. He did ever so well and looked really sharp. It would be an enormous blow if we were to lose him, so I’d prefer to concentrate on the satisfaction and positivity I can take from the game.”
Sterling, a 64th-minute substitute for the impressive Wayne Rooney, was dismissed for a reckless challenge on Valencia 14 minutes later, with the Manchester United winger reacting by grabbing his opponent by the back of his neck and, when Sterling turned round, his throat. That prompted a melee on the touchline before the American referee, Jair Marrufo, produced the red card for both players.
“I’m disappointed,” Hodgson said. “I thought it was a fierce challenge from young Raheem, not a foul challenge. He played the ball and accelerated into the ball. I’m disappointed with Antonio’s reaction, grabbing the player. Had he not jumped up there wouldn’t have been a problem but, when he does that, the referee had to deal with that and sent Raheem off.
“And, of course, Jack Wilshere had been on the receiving end a few minutes earlier from a challenge from an Ecuadorian player and did not react. A very similar challenge. I’m pleased Raheem didn’t react to a lot of people milling around him on the touchline.”
Steven Gerrard, who was not included among the substitutes but was the last Valencia apologised for his behaviour. “I am sorry for the fight with Sterling,” he said, adding: “England are the best team we’ve played so far.”
There were positives in this performance, not least from Rooney’s 39th goal for his country and Ross Barkley’s bold full debut at senior level, though the manager sought to dampen enthusiasm for the latter’s display by pointing out the rough edges in the young Everton midfielder’s game. “There always seems to be an enormous obsession with one player,” said Hodgson when asked if Barkley would be ready to start against Italy on 14 June. “I will be prepared to start any of my players in any game but I’m not prepared to address your obsession with Ross Barkley.
“He had some good moments but he lost the ball an awful lot of times as well. If he’s going to be the player we want him to be, he has to make better decisions as to when he turns with the ball. I think he needs to learn when he can turn with the ball and when he has to keep the ball. But that’s quite normal for a player his age. That’s not a criticism but there were other performances out there who merited your obsession more than Ross Barkley’s. Oxlade-Chamberlain and Phil Jones were outstanding, Jack Wilshere in the middle of the park, Rickie Lambert scored a magnificent goal.”
“I was disappointed with the sendings-off and the potential injury to one of our players. But as a friendly, a warm-up match for our players, it was good. 