Lampard focused on England's World Cup campaignThe man who will captain his country against Ecuador at the Sun Life stadium on Wednesday was clearly still coming to terms with the “mutual decision” that has prompted 16 clubs to scramble in pursuit of his services. “I never really thought I’d see the day,” he said. “I was so entrenched at “It has been a huge part of my life so it cannot be anything but a wrench to leave. But if you’d asked me when I signed whether I’d be here 13 years later, I wouldn’t have believed you. I can be very proud and pleased with what’s happened there. I go with a very happy feeling and respect for the club.”
His status in that corner of south-west London is established for ever, his list of honours glittering: three Premier League titles, four FA Cups, two League Cups, a Champions League and a Europa League; a club record 211 goals in 648 appearances. He will be recognised as one of, if not the, greatest Chelsea player ever, an icon whose impact has been prolonged.
Yet the issue now is what happens next? There are 27 days still to run on the 35-year-old’s last contract, time that will be spent in Brazil with “To some extent he’ll always be ‘Frank Lampard, Chelsea’,” said That prompted a smile from the midfielder at the manager’s side but, while his focus is fixed on making an impact in Brazil, it would be unreasonable to imagine he is not wondering about the future, particularly while preparing in the United States. New York City, Major League Soccer’s new franchise to launch in March 2015, have held productive talks with his representative and appear to be his likeliest destination. If he signs up with Manchester City’s sister club he will need short-term employment, presumably back in the Premier League, for the first half of next season.
Queens Park Rangers, managed by his uncle Harry Redknapp, would be a persuasive initial option before a move to the US but Lampard was insistent no final decision had been made. “I’d like to get it sorted out soon,” he said. “Not in World Cup time – I’m not sure it’s possible to do now – but after that would be ideal. I’m looking at different options but the American thing is one, I make no bones about that. The main thing is I want to carry on playing. I feel very fit and fresh and I’m enjoying it, so I’d love to play for a few more years. But it’s something to be parked at the minute. That it’s now out there has allowed me to clear my head, though I’m quite a big boy. I can handle it. It’s a weight off my shoulders to an extent.”
This will be a summer swan song for Lampard. He was loth to admit it but his career at this level will also be curtailed after the finals in Brazil. “It looks that way,” he offered. “It’s very hard to get the words out to say that. I’ve never said it before and I’ve had plenty of opportunities to do so. Most players finish with England in their low 30s, yet I’ve had some of my most enjoyable England years in the back end of my career, so I won’t say it yet. If we go and win [the World Cup], I’ll probably hang my boots up – it’s kind of obvious it comes in the end at some point. But I won’t write myself off yet.”
He will earn his 104th cap against Ecuador, his ambition still to earn a starting place in this side at the tournament even if he accepts that his duties extend further than the pitch these days. He has become a mentor for younger members of this squad, a senior figure upon whom others can lean. “It doesn’t bother me thinking about being a cover player or a starter,” he added. “And I do see my role here in a broader sense, to help things go in the right direction. We’ve been there when it hasn’t been so great. We know the pitfalls and, if we can help guide the youngsters, we will. I’ve certainly come along for the ride. That’s what we all are here for and it’s a fantastic ride.” His journey has been more remarkable than most.
