The West Bromwich Albion goalkeeper will start Wednesday’s friendly against Ecuador at Miami’s Sun Life stadium as Roy Hodgson offers playing time to those members of his squad who did not start Friday’s victory against Peru. Foster made his England debut in 2007 but has only six caps, the last of which was as a half-time substitute for Joe Hart against the Republic of Ireland last year, with this to be his first start since the 2-1 home defeat to France in November 2010.
The 31-year-old had ruled himself out of selection in May of the following year, citing “niggling injuries” that had taken their toll on his body and praising Joe Hart, as “an excellent custodian” who would go on to be “one of the greatest”. Life as an understudy had clearly influenced his decision, though, having been persuaded to return by his former manager at West Brom, Roy Hodgson, Foster has now suggested family issues were key.
“First, to say I’d packed it in is a bit harsh,” he said. “It wasn’t packing it in. It was a very big decision but I had a newborn baby and another child under a year old. Family is a very important thing for me and it felt like I was missing out on them growing up. I knew there would be criticism and people were entitled to criticise because most would give their right hand to be at a “Being second-choice genuinely wasn’t the reason. It was the fact I had a newborn baby and another child under a year old. They’re like sponges at that age, taking everything in, and not being around was too much for me to deal with. Whenever I went away, all I was thinking about was being back at home with the family, and it was affecting my football. It’s a kind of home sickness, really.”
Asked whether he would have made the same decision if he had been No1 ahead of Hart, Foster added: “It’s something to think about … Family is really important to me. That’s a big question, that.”
The goalkeeper had discussed retirement with his family before making the announcement, much to the surprise of the then manager, Fabio Capello. “I spoke to my wife, my family, my mum and dad,” he said. “We all talked about it: a few of them thought I was barmy; a few could understand it. It’s how you value family, where you place it on your scale of importance. For me, it’s super important. My brothers, Brett and Adrian, thought I was mad. They’re both Sunday league players and they were, like: ‘What are you thinking?’ But I knew what I wanted to do. My mum and dad were supportive, my sister too.
“I was always going to come back to the team if the manager was happy to have me, and thankfully this manager was. Getting to West Brom with Roy helped my case. He understands people and that footballers aren’t just machines. We have kids and families. He’s personable. He understands. Roy first asked me back to go to the European Championships in Ukraine [in 2012] but at the time I didn’t think it was fair to just jump into a tournament ahead of someone else. When he gave me the call subsequently it was an easy decision. The kids were a bit older – four and five – and it’s easier to be away from them. Now I feel very fortunate to be here and going to a World Cup.”
He will travel to Brazil as Hart’s understudy again, the Manchester City goalkeeper having emerged stronger from his toils with his club last autumn and, unlike in South Africa four years ago, with the hierarchy very much defined. “Coming to a World Cup you need to know you have your own role and that there’s a pecking order in the goalkeeping unit,” said Foster, who had contacted Hart during the City player’s dip in form to offer encouragement last year. “We know that Joe’s No1. Our duty, myself and Fraser [Forster], is to get Joe prepared not only mentally but physically for that first game against Italy. Whatever we can do, whether that’s staying behind to do some shooting drills, we’ll do.”
