If there was a sense of excitement whipped up by Roy Hodgson’s bold squad selection for the The clamour is for a more expansive game-plan to that employed by Hodgson at Euro 2012, largely by necessity given that he had been parachuted in late after Fabio Capello’s departure. The reality is the English are still likely to allow opponents the majority of possession, but should boast the ability to prosper more incisively on the counter-attack.
Hodgson tends to deflect questioning of his tactics in public appearances. Asked at the squad announcement briefing whether he had settled upon his basic framework for the opening group game against Italy, he replied: “No, no. Not yet. I don’t need to do that yet.”
He is a pragmatic manager who will pick sides and approaches to suit particular opposition, but it is safe to assume he will seek to employ a variety of 4-3-3 or a 4-2-3-1, the structure en vogue, with Steven Gerrard anchoring his midfield. There have been clues offered about his approach in as much as he has spent much of this season scouting players at Liverpool and Southampton – they supply eight of the 23 – whose high pressing game, stifling opponents at source, has been so effective last season in the Premier League.
Yet transposing those tactics on to a confrontation with the What has yet to be properly ascertained are the combinations he might employ in his starting line-up. If he seeks to employ Daniel Sturridge through the centre, where he is at his most effective, does Wayne Rooney drop deeper into the No10 role? And, if so, does the team then have to play 4-2-3-1 with, potentially, Adam Lallana on one side and Raheem Sterling on the other? The alternative, a 4-3-3 with Rooney through the middle, would presumably anchor Sturridge or Danny Welbeck on the left and leave the manager open to criticism for not playing his best players in their favoured positions.
Yet, if 4-2-3-1 is the way to go, where does that leave central midfield? Gerrard, as captain, will anchor as he did so impressively throughout Liverpool’s recent campaign, but is he partnered in a central role by his club-mate Jordan Henderson, who currently has only eight caps? And how can Jack Wilshere best be integrated into the system? The Arsenal midfielder has looked most comfortable in the national side when featuring in a trio, backed up by Gerrard and Frank Lampard in anchoring roles. But using him there affects the whole structure of the team. These are dilemmas the manager must confront.
The hope is that he uses his players in the positions where their form caught his eye at club level. Sturridge should be central. Sterling, at 19, must be given freedom to maraud. Ross Barkley, if thrown on from the bench, must be given the chance to prompt from a playmaker’s No10 role, feeding Rooney further up-field or, potentially, in place of the more experienced man. A lot is already being asked of a number of young players, with this squad boasting only five players who have previously featured at a World Cup. Surely the best way to eke the best from them will be make their roles as familiar as possible.
It will be hard for a player who has excelled in such a globally popular competition as the Premier League to “surprise” on this stage, but Raheem Sterling could potentially take his reputation to another level. The teenager only has two caps at present but, over the course of Liverpool’s breath-taking run-in, scintillated consistently from flank to centre. “Raheem is an offensive player, an attacking player and a creative player who works hard,” said his club manager, Brendan Rodgers. “If he is given the opportunity to play how he can play, whether at the point of a diamond or on the sides, then he could be one of the stars of the World Cup. If he continues to have that confidence to play with no fear, then he could be a really stand-out player. The key is if he is asked to play that way.”
There is the usual heady expectation swirling around Wayne Rooney, a player who has only really excelled at one major tournament – and that a decade ago – though the fear is too much is anticipated of some of the juniors. Daniel Sturridge, for example, may be prolific for Liverpool but he has yet to flourish for the national side. That is largely because he can be thrust out wide, where he grew so frustrated during his spell at Chelsea, too readily. If he is utilised through the middle and is offered a supply-line, he should prosper. If not, he may prove a little too peripheral for comfort.
The group is awkward if negotiable, particularly if 