Gary Cahill has welcomed the resumption of his centre-half partnership with Phil Jagielka before the Cahill and Jagielka were reunited against Peru last Friday for the first time since the decisive 2-0 qualifying victory over Poland last October and they each scored against the South Americans after the interval. The run-in to Jagielka’s Everton campaign was wrecked by a hamstring injury, which meant he missed 11 games before returning to the line-up against Manchester City in the first week of May and now, like Cahill, he will hope to make his first appearance at a major finals in Brazil this summer.
“We have exciting, attacking players, haven’t we? Everyone comes along and pays to watch players take on their opponents, to do what Daniel Sturridge did against Peru and hit one in the corner from 25 yards – that is what people like to see,” said Cahill, who had missed Euro 2012 after fracturing his jaw in the team’s final warm-up match, against Belgium. Jagielka travelled to that tournament but was not selected. “But at the back we are going about our business quietly. We work hard to keep goals out and it is going well. We are proud of our record and we want to build on that and take it into the World Cup where it counts.”
That record is impressive, albeit generated in friendlies and qualifying matches. Cahill and Jagielka have not lost any of the 12 matches in which they have been paired. Their record in the six competitive games they have played alongside each other reads five wins and a draw, with the only goal conceded coming in a 4-1 success against Montenegro last autumn. There was another clean sheet on Friday with both players, in combination with Joe Hart at their back, impressive.
England fly out to Miami ahead of World Cup - video


“I am aware we have kept quite a few clean sheets which, as defenders, we are pleased about,” said Cahill, who enjoyed an outstanding season at Stamford Bridge. “Friday’s was another one to add to the list. I am pleased Jags is fit and I am pleased he is back. He is a huge player for us. We are both pretty talkative on the pitch and have a good understanding. It has come from playing a few games together. You don’t play with someone and, all of a sudden, hit it off straight away but there is now a definite understanding of each other’s game. We will keep working on things and it is not just me and Jags but also the other defenders and how we work together.”
The 28-year-old excelled alongside John Terry at Chelsea this season and has learned much from the former “Personally I feel more experienced. I know the role a lot better. I feel comfortable and that I have now been accepted on this stage, although I want to keep on learning and pushing forward. Going to Chelsea has gone really well for me and I cannot wait to get started on what will be my first major competition for England and I am very excited. But I have to keep learning, keep working hard and keep improving.”
