Rooney was playing for the first time since his club side’s Premier League victory over Norwich on 26 April and, having taken fitness coaches with him on a family holiday in Portugal, appeared ring-rusty in a No10 role behind Daniel Sturridge. The latter’s stunning goal opened the scoring and set Hodgson was unperturbed by Rooney’s performance having seen the run-in to his domestic season hampered by a groin injury. “We think we know where he is in terms of how his fitness is being maintained or progressing,” said the manager. “We took him and [Steven] Gerrard off tonight, both important members of our squad because we don’t have too many senior players in the squad, and 3-0 seemed an opportunity to give the younger ones a go. I don’t have any fears in that respect [of his fitness]. His attitude and commitment are first-class, even in a game of this nature. He has two more weeks to keep that going.
“I was happy with Rooney’s performance and have no need to consider now which strikers I will play against Italy in Manaus in two weeks’ time. I’m very pleased with the options I’ve got in my strike-force and I have two weeks of training and matches to decide the line-up. I won’t decide until the last week or even the last day before the game [in Manaus].”
Peru defended effectively until Sturridge’s opener, his third international goal in five starts, before they were exposed at set pieces after the interval. Leighton Baines was withdrawn as a precaution after feeling a twinge in his calf and both Phil Jones and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain – not in the match-day squad here – can be expected to start against Ecuador in Miami on Wednesday. “They could have played tonight but we thought it would be better for them to do an extra day’s training,” said Hodgson. “The most important thing for us was to come through it unscathed, injury-wise. It was a wonderful send-off to the England depart for Miami and will use the Adidas World Cup ball, the Brazuca, in the games against Ecuador and Honduras despite contractual obligations leaving them playing with a Nike ball against Peru. Sturridge took heart from his goal regardless. “It was difficult because “The focus has been on Brazil,” added Hodgson. “It was about what we wanted to do out there, rather than what they would offer. Peru gave me exactly the type of test I wanted. Many games in Brazil, if we do well, will be of this nature. Teams are good these days at getting players behind the ball, making certain it’s hard to break through and find a clear way through, and they can hit you on the counter. So this was fine preparation.”
