This combination may never work as a conventional front pairing but, while they can conjure rewards as impressive as this, that may not trouble Roy Hodgson too much. Both players tend to thrive in isolation anyway, even when Rooney drops deeper to divert passes into the path of on-rushing team-mates. Certainly there were precious few link-ups between the pair here but, as the manager had stated, “If they both play their individual games, the combination will take care of itself.” He was delighted by Sturridge’s deliciously curled finish from outside the area just after the half-hour. The Liverpool forward has now registered in three of his last five starts for his country. But will opponents in Brazil offer Sturridge that much space? Rooney was becalmed as if playing within himself, one lung-busting run to repel a Peruvian attack aside, with his delivery invariably veering wide to Danny Welbeck or back towards central midfield. On the basis that Sturridge is the striker with most bite, perhaps Hodgson has to accept the front two will rarely combine their efforts. Games may have to be won with bouts of individual brilliance instead.
Welbeck’s inclusion from the start may have offered an indication of Hodgson’s thinking for the Italy game. The Manchester United forward may be under-used by his club but he has been a mainstay for his country, a player who combines work-rate with pace down the left. “We trust and believe in Danny Welbeck,” said Hodgson. The forward offered only flashes at best, dribbles from deep which were eventually snuffed out and the occasional flick, and his eagerness to meander centrally forced Rooney and Sturridge further apart. But Welbeck is a favourite and, if he starts, presumably Sterling will begin on the bench, as he did here? There is a logic to holding him back but only if Welbeck is performing. Certainly the third of the trident behind Sturridge, Adam Lallana, warrants inclusion from the start. He is deceptively strong on the ball and far from a conventional wide player. He seems to fit the Hodgson mould: a reliable, industrious forward-thinker whose versatility will be cherished. He remains a plus.
If Hodgson pursues his version of 4-2-3-1, which now seems likely, then there is an opening alongside Steven Gerrard in deep-lying midfield which, on this evidence, is still to be filled. Jordan Henderson and 