Hodgson pleased with Rooney's recovery ahead of World Cup – videoRoy Hodgson is prepared to drop Scholes had questioned whether Hodgson would have the “balls” to omit Rooney if his form was not “up to scratch in the warm-ups or in the first game of the World Cup” and suggested the 28-year-old, whose impact at major finals has been so fitful since Euro 2004, may have peaked. Those assertions were rejected by “I’d like to think that, as someone who has been a manager for a long time, I have the capacity to make the decisions that are necessary,” Hodgson said when asked about Scholes’s comments. “And secondly, of course I don’t think Wayne Rooney’s past his best. I’ve selected him in a 23-man squad that I’m very proud of. I believe in Wayne Rooney. He’s still a young man. The real opinions that are going to count are from the staff and the players. Hopefully we will get our decisions right and have a good tournament.”
Gerrard was more forthright in his rebuttal of Scholes, with whom he had played at Euro 2004. “I do have an opinion and, for me, I think Paul Scholes is wrong,” the Liverpool midfielder said. “I think Wayne’s been Manchester United’s best player at home and in Europe. Does anyone disagree with that? [David] de Gea’s a keeper, they don’t count. I think [Rooney] has been in terrific form. From what I’ve seen from his performances in the United team, his form has been really positive.
“He’s worked hard this week. He decided to do his own week of extra training and he seems in a better frame of mind going into this tournament than he’s had going into previous tournaments, when he’s had injuries on his mind in the past. I’m excited about where Wayne Rooney is at.” The striker will earn his 90th cap against Peru as he seeks to add to his tally of 38 goals for Hodgson, who hosted the prime minister, David Cameron, at St George’s Park on Thursday, intends to select a strong side against Peru with the opening His principal selection dilemma concerns Jack Wilshere, a player with only 42 minutes of competitive football since breaking a foot against Denmark in March, with the Arsenal midfielder badly in need of game time. Yet the likes of Liverpool’s Raheem Sterling and Adam Lallana of Southampton are expected to feature. Luke Shaw is suffering from a heavy cold and will be assessed on Friday.
England have been weakened by untimely injuries in friendlies before major tournaments in recent times, and Hodgson lost Gary Cahill and Gareth Barry before Euro 2012. “The players have got to be sensible too,”Gerrard said. “If you’ve got any niggles, any problems, you’ve got to make sure the staff are aware. They’re doing everything they can, injury prevention before and after every session which will keep everyone available. You get nothing for being too brave at this stage. If you have any kind of niggle, you have to make it clear because it can get an awful lot worse.”
The visitors are ranked 42 in the world, alongside the Cape Verde Islands, having failed to qualify for a World Cup since 1982. Indeed, they have not won a game since beating Ecuador in a qualifier a year ago. Their manager, Pablo Bengoechea, who took up the reins in March, will oversee his first match in charge with a young side given the absence of the experienced Claudio Pizarro and Jose Paolo Guerrero. They were selected with England’s group game against Uruguay in mind, with Hodgson seeking a rousing send-off before departing for the United States on Sunday.
“I’ve been impressed by the attitude, the enthusiasm and the energy [of the England squad], and the quality, of course,” Hodgson said. “They really have brought those qualities to the table. But the one thing we have constantly done is to emphasise our job is to be in peak condition on 14 June [against Italy]. It doesn’t help a great deal if you peak 10 days before or 10 days afterwards. We’ve got to be in great form when that moment arrives and everything we’re doing is to make sure we get there.
“Things could not have gone better so far, but I am a great believer sometimes when things are going well, watch out because that is when the blow comes from left field and strikes you. If this game doesn’t go well, it will be a great disappointment.”
