The Fulham goalkeeper David Stockdale has apologised to the club's supporters following the team's relegation from the Premier League after 13 years as a top-flight club but believes Stockdale was one of Fulham's more impressive performers during the season having ousted Maarten Stekelenburg, who joined from Roma last June. A summer of cost-cutting is anticipated at Craven Cottage, with the Dutch goalkeeper one of those expected to leave, as the club readjust for life in the second tier, with the owner, Shahid Khan, and Magath having made clear the attitude of some senior players in a bloated squad had been unacceptable.
Khan, who bought the club from Mohamed Al Fayed last July, offered an apology for the part he played in their relegation in his programme notes for Sunday's final league game against Crystal Palace. Asked if those sentiments were echoed in the dressing room, Stockdale said: "Definitely. The chairman is saying it but I believe it is down to the players. We cannot shift blame on to anyone else. We need to stand up. We are big enough people and we get paid a lot of money to do the job we are doing, so why shouldn't we take the responsibility on our shoulders and not blame other people?
"The truth hurts. You cannot get away from it. You got relegated and you have got to deal with it. If you can look yourself in the mirror and say to yourself you gave 100%, then you will go to bed nice and easy. But, I tell you what, I didn't go to bed nice and easy this week. Because this is the club I love and the club that gave me a chance. I am an honest person and I always think about what I could have done better. I go through every one of my games. No one is perfect but it is about looking back and improving, showing that you care. Personally I feel disappointed because we got relegated. It is not just about my performances. It is about the club staying where it should be."
There were promising signs in Sunday's draw, with Cauley Woodrow and Chris David scoring their first goals for the club. "They gave the manager something to think about next year," added Stockdale, who was on loan at Hull City when they clinched promotion to the Premier League in 2013. "It has got to be a mix. You have got to push the youth along, really bring them through, but there have got to be experienced heads as well because the Championship is not easy. It is not going to be a walkover. Just because you are Premier League players now it does not make you Premier League players next year.
"It is nice that we know now Magath is staying. There is no reshuffling or rejigging. He has got to do his job and, if he does that, and gets people behind him who believe in him, and in whom he believes, then we are going in the right direction. You need someone with a bit of grit and determination and we know he has got that. At Hull we had a bit of team unity and a manager, in Steve Bruce, who was a bit like this one: someone who was not afraid to make decisions when he had to. We had togetherness. We'll need that because it is a 46-game season in the Championship and you might be going to Bournemouth on a wet Tuesday night and then QPR at the weekend. It is a totally different level."
