At least Fulham's 13-year stint in the There were positives to be taken here, albeit only belatedly after a traumatic campaign, in David's quality on the flank and Cauley Woodrow's energy and ability up front. The striker also registered a maiden senior goal for The flashes of quality were timely, not least because the chairman, Shahid Khan, had used his programme notes to denounce as "simply unacceptable" the attitude of some in the senior squad over a campaign that has seen them lose 24 matches, been overseen by three managers, sign a player for a record fee who has started only one game, and eventually relegated to the Championship. Khan, who had completed his purchase from Mohamed Al Fayed last July, retains "complete faith" in the current incumbent, Felix Magath, to streamline the squad and mount the recovery.
"You have my word that Fulham will return to the Premier League not only as soon, but as smartly, as possible," he wrote in absentia. "For that to happen, we will feature players who are committed to Fulham, who passionately care about the FFC badge and who will take personal and professional accountability in the welfare of the club at every turn. To be clear, many of our players answered that call this season, and I thank them all. But, as our record suggests, compliance throughout the entire squad was severely lacking, and that's simply unacceptable. We will be better in 2014/15."
There were significant absentees from Magath's selection here, the full-backs John Arne Riise and Sascha Riether joining the loanees Lewis Holtby and Darren Bent on the sidelines, and Maarten Stekelenburg omitted from the bench. "Three managers in one season, and every one except me brought his own players into the team,"Magath said. "We had no team who identified with Fulham. We never fought as a team against relegation. I'm sorry to say such things, but I see Sunderland and Norwich playing, even Norwich here at Craven Cottage …they had much more fight. I asked my team: 'What's going on?' One told me: 'We cannot fight.'"
That was damning, the lack of spirit having effectively condemned them early to the drop. They might have learned from Palace's revival under Tony Pulis, particularly given those from across the river are unrecognisable now from the shambles who succumbed 4-1 at home to Fulham back in October. Pulis's team finished 11th, the manager to meet again with the co-chairman Steve Parish in the week ahead to discuss plans for the future.
Dwight Gayle's second brace of the final week, a clever poked finish to deflect in the opener and a ripped free-kick from distance, served notice of his special talent.
Palace should have registered more, Glenn Murray thumping against the bar at the end and David Stockdale doing well to deny Scott Dann and Yannock Bolasie, but their season still feels like a triumph. Fulham can at least carry a little optimism forward courtesy of David's late plunder. "It was a sign for everybody that we are hopeful for the future," added Magath. "It will give our supporters hope that it will be better."
