"We have no defensive plan for Thiago Motta," José Mourinho had suggested on the eve of this contest. "He can play free, no problem. We can't be worried about him." The Portuguese was illustrating how his side had to approach this game with attack rather than suffocation in mind, rather than dismissing the threat posed by a player who had been integral under his stewardship at Internazionale. Yet there were still periods when ignoring Motta seemed like folly.
He had been pressed in the first leg in an attempt to cut off the supply line to Zlatan Ibrahimovic. The Swede was absent here, but the Italy international was still influential, the timing of his interceptions on The Cameroonian had been Mourinho's gamble of a selection, the state of the 33-year-old's hamstring the risk the manager felt he had to take. Eto'o had not featured since limping out of the derby thrashing of Arsenal, his job done once he had opened the scoring, and he was sure to be rusty here. Even fragile. He was also peripheral for periods, hovering on the shoulder of Thiago Silva and Alex, hoping to isolate the latter. The former The intrigue down Chelsea's left flank should have centred upon Eden Hazard, a player PSG covet, in direct confrontation with the livewire Lucas Moura, the £32m Brazilian whose impact in France has been rather inconsistent. As the Belgian hobbled away early on and Moura seared at an uncharacteristically flustered César Azpilicueta, the contest seemed settled. Yet, while the Brazilian was sharp and elusive drawing a foul from Willian, for which the Chelsea player was booked, with one sprint he lacked a killer edge until forcing Cech into a late save.
Schürrle, summoned from the bench for Hazard, provided far more clout. The German was direct and aggressive, feeding off scraps from Eto'o and, later Demba Ba, but it was his drift into space away from Alex and Verratti before meeting David Luiz's flick-on which had offered the hosts hope. He crunched a shot from Willian's astute cut-back on to the crossbar after the interval as PSG were stretched, his eager running offering the home side an outlet they tapped with glee.
The absence of Ibrahimovic, other than draining charisma from the contest, did not affect PSG's approach or philosophy, with Edinson Cavani merely slipping into the central berth he has been craving while marooned on the right running the channels for the Swede. His goalscoring record since moving from Napoli for a French record â‚¬64m last summer is still impressive, but Chelsea shackled him well here. He was closed down well by Terry and the excellent Cahill snapping at his back, frustrated by David Luiz and Frank Lampard when he dropped deeper, and eventually exasperated to the extent he blocked a free-kick and was booked.
The chances came once Chelsea had gone for broke, but his finishing lacked composure. Rather, it was Ezequiel Lavezzi who had caused the home side more consternation, his scurrying runs into space threatening to wound them as they had at Parc des Princes. His free-kick forced Petr Cech into a fine save while the bar was still quivering at the other end having been thumped by Schürrle and Oscar. Chelsea were relieved at his departure.
