PSG were beaten at the quarter-final stage by Barcelona last season but, having established a 13-point lead at the top of Ligue 1 with a second successive domestic title close, Laurent Blanc's side are more confident of progressing at least one stage further.
"Chelsea are a big team but it did not matter who we drew: we don't fear anybody," said the forward, Ezequiel Lavezzi. "We have to respect Chelsea of course because they have a successful coach and very good players but now, if you ask me who are the superior team, then I have to say PSG.
"We have built one of the strongest teams in the world and we feel that now this is our time. PSG has now arrived at a level where anything is possible. We are at a level where we attract the best players in the world, where we can beat any team in the world, and of course where we can win the Mourinho has never lost a Champions League quarter-final and, having seen his side beaten at Crystal Palace on Saturday to undermine their hopes of reclaiming the Premier League title, is confident his players will be galvanised by playing PSG. Samuel Eto'o is not expected to travel as he continues his rehabilitation from a hamstring injury, while Ashley Cole will also be absent as he recovers from minor knee ligament damage.
"PSG can win the Champions League, but they could also lose to Chelsea," said Mourinho in l'Equipe. "Are PSG a good team? Yes. Do they possess some of the best players in the world? Yes again. At this precise moment, we are at a stage of the competition where the big teams can win but also lose. There aren't any more weak sides at this stage. There are some who are better than others, but anything can happen."
PSG have their own minor injury problems, with neither Jérémy Ménez nor Gregory van der Wiel to feature having missed training on Monday, though their squad depth will ensure the pair's absence is not keenly felt.
"This is a match everyone is waiting for," said the midfielder, Blaise Matuidi. "It's the Champions League, and so a huge match everyone is focused completely on winning. We host them in the first leg, so we have to impose ourselves on the tie ahead of the return. A win without conceding would be ideal."
