Steven Gerrard believes input from Dr Steve Peters will give England's players an edge at the World Cup finals after Roy Hodgson confirmed the renowned sports psychiatrist is to join his backroom staff for the summer's tournament in Brazil.
Peters, who is credited as a major influence in the success enjoyed by Sir Chris Hoy and Victoria Pendleton with British Cycling, has an impressive portfolio of clients, including Team Sky, UK Athletics and the five-times world snooker champion Ronnie O'Sullivan. Peters has been employed by Liverpool on a one-day-per-week basis since November 2012 and will take up his duties with the national side before the friendly against Peru in May.
Hodgson has effectively confirmed Leighton Baines will be his first-choice left-back in Brazil, with Ashley Cole and Luke Shaw, the latter on his debut, both to be granted game-time in Wednesday's friendly against Denmark in the Evertonian's absence. Gerrard will captain the side against the Danes and has used Peters since undergoing surgery on a groin injury in the spring of 2011.
While the focus will inevitably be drawn towards the impact the psychiatrist may have on England's prospects in penalty shootouts, the Liverpool midfielder believes the new addition to the staff can be influential in all areas if team-mates "buy into" his approach."He's really helped me, not so much with the technical side of the game but with what's going on in my head and the mental preparation," said Gerrard.
"I had a groin avulsion, which is where your groin muscle comes off the bone, and it's a career-threatening injury. At the time I'd seen three or four surgeons and they weren't really convincing me that I could play again, so I turned to him. He helps you with positivity, the power of thought, staying upbeat, that sort of stuff. I was a little bit lost and he just simplifies what's going on. If the players buy into it he will be able to help them with mental preparation, especially in pressure situations.
"There are no guarantees. Steve Peters has not transformed me as a person or a player. When I did go and see him I was still playing for Liverpool and for "We are not going to become favourites for the England have turned to sports psychologists in the past, with Sven-Goran Eriksson having used Willi Railo and Bill Beswick taken on by Steve McClaren during his brief tenure as national manager. Hodgson has already indicated Sir Dave Brailsford is to address his players before the Peru fixture, the team's final game before they leave first for Miami and then Rio, with the sports scientist and former rugby union coach Dave Reddin, now the Football Association's head of performance services, also to be part of his backroom staff in Brazil. They will be joined by a nutritionist and another fitness coach.
Hodgson and Adrian Bevington, the managing director of Club England, met Peters on Sunday evening to discuss his involvement, having been given the green light by Liverpool to utilise his services.
"It is important I don't heap too much pressure on him and suggest we will now be better at a World Cup, and suddenly we will never miss a penalty or no player will ever get sent off or lose his temper," said the manager. "But, from my point of view, I am bringing somebody on board who can only do good. His advice, ideas and approach can only help as long as the players want that. We are not going to insist that every player must go to individual meetings with Steve Peters but we'd hope his presence, with his expertise, will encourage the players and that he is a tool they can benefit from.
"If there is a tool that can help you become better, you are foolish not to take advantage of it. If you're going to have these people they need to be regulars, not people you ship in to give a very good lecture on mental preparation, speaks to the group of players and then disappears. I'm not so certain that works. So he will be around us to get some sort of relationship with the players and persuade them: 'Listen, if we work together and I give you the benefit of my expertise, it can help you.'"
Brailsford has described Peters in the past as a "genius" and both Pendleton and Hoy claimed he had contributed heavily to their Olympic successes. While at Liverpool Peters has helped such as Jordan Henderson, who is set to start for England against Denmark, come through difficult periods in his fledgling career to demonstrate his quality. The midfielder will be joined in the starting line-up against the Danes by his club-mates Daniel Sturridge and Glen Johnson, who gains his 50th cap, and Raheem Sterling is likely to begin on the flank.
Cole is expected to start, gaining his 107th cap, although Hodgson will scrutinise both his and Shaw's displays, having indicated Baines is currently first choice in his thinking. The West Bromwich Albion goalkeeper Ben Foster will most likely replace Joe Hart at half-time, with Kyle Walker the only member of Hodgson's 30-man squad out of contention. The Tottenham Hotspur right-back is still suffering from a hip injury that will keep him out for another week.
