Adam Lallana has hailed Luke Shaw as the best teenager he has played alongside as the The midfielder has seen Theo Walcott, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and, most impressively, Gareth Bale graduate through the academy at the south-coast club but considers Shaw's progress the most jaw-dropping. The 18-year-old, who made his league debut for Southampton only last season, will gain a first cap against the Danes as he seeks to persuade Hodgson that he should be included ahead of Leighton Baines or Ashley Cole in the party for Brazil.
"He's got such a level head on his shoulders and is so grounded," said Lallana, who hopes to gain a third cap this week. "Luke wouldn't for one minute have thought he'd be involved in the senior team but he's an outstanding talent and one of the best, probably the best player I've ever seen at 18. He's won plaudits and gained recognition, and he's certainly good enough to be here today.
"It's hard to compare him with the others: Gareth's gone on and never looked back. I know Gareth did play left-back as well, so there are similarities there, but I wouldn't want to put too much pressure on Luke. He's done unbelievably for us this season. When Gareth was playing with us we were in the Championship. For Luke, at 18, to be playing so consistently well for us against some of the best wingers in the world, that's credit to him and his attitude and how he keeps his feet on the ground. Nothing fazes him and I'm really excited to hopefully see him get some minutes on Wednesday."
Lallana, who took a slight knock against Liverpool on Saturday, was one of five players to concentrate on recovery work as Hodgson's 30-man squad trained at Tottenham Hotspur's Enfield complex on Monday. While Steven Caulker, Andros Townsend and John Ruddy are to play a full part in training on the eve of the The match is the last opportunity for players to impress in an "This is the last chance we'll have to impress, so it is going to be a big night," he said. "Performing for your country in a World Cup, there's nothing bigger. It's the pinnacle of a footballer's career. We all want to strive for greatness really. It starts this Wednesday, in terms of preparation."
The midfielder impressed in his two appearances last November, against Chile and Germany, only to be subsequently accused of having changed by the referee, Mark Clattenburg, during a Premier League defeat at Everton in December. Southampton lodged an official complaint to the Football Association, subsequently dismissed, after claiming the Fifa elite referee had told the player: "You are very different now, since you've played for England. You never used to be like this."
"Listen, through the duration of lots of games you have to speak to the referee, especially as the captain, and you feel as if you are protecting your team at times," added Lallana. "That was a long time ago now. Mark has refereed our games since and we are absolutely fine. The club made the complaint, not me. Me and Mark are absolutely fine. He managed our game against West Ham, and I saw him when we exchanged the team-sheets before the game, and we're absolutely fine.
"I don't feel I've changed at all. I've taken lots out of it, training-wise, playing with the best players not in the world but in England. It's where you want to be as a player. Hopefully it can continue. You have to try and take it in your stride as much as you can. It is a big deal, playing for your country and you want to do as well as you can. And that's all I've tried to do. I've continued to try and do that, to help my country and keep improving."
