José Mourinho has rejected Manuel Pellegrini's claims that Chelsea must still be considered heavyweights in the transfer market and suggested the The Portuguese, who welcomes Fernando Torres back to his squad after a knee injury for Tuesday's trip to West Bromwich Albion, was unimpressed by Pellegrini's assertion last Friday that Chelsea are "the team that spends the most money in the last 10 years, the team that spends the most money this year, so a little bit rich". Mourinho was not questioned specifically about the City manager's comments, but offered his thoughts regardless.
Asked why he considered the other title contenders to be in a better position to challenge for the Premier League this term, Mourinho replied: "I don't have to repeat myself a lot, but everybody knows what Manchester City are. What I would like to say is that, for example, Pellegrini was talking about the money we've spent. I think he's a fantastic coach, and I respect that a lot, and on top of that, outside his football career, he's an engineer by qualification. I don't think an engineer needs a calculator to do Mata £37m and De Bruyne £18m, so that's £55m. Matic is £21m and Salah is £11m. That's £32m, and 55 minus 32 is 23.
"So "Pellegrini has a fantastic team, fantastic players, and is a good manager. He has lots of experience, so it's not a problem for him. There are 13 matches left and 39 points available, and that's an eternity in a league. He's been speaking about winning four competitions, so there's no reason to change the speech. But the only thing that is funny that he keeps saying he never responds to Mourinho, he never comments about Mourinho. He said that in Spain, too. So, he's changed."
Mourinho, who had chosen not to factor in Kurt Zouma's £12m arrival from St Etienne into his run down of Chelsea's spending, anticipates the Football Association handing City's influential midfielder, Yaya Touré, a three-match ban. The midfielder had appeared to kick the Norwich forward Ricky van Wolfswinkel off the ball during Saturday's goalless draw at Carrow Road. The FA are expected to announce on Monday whether the Ivorian has been charged with violent conduct.
"I don't understand why it would be an 