Wojciech Szczesny has pointed to Arsenal's newfound defensive solidity as reason for optimism in their pursuit of a first Premier League title in a decade, as Arsène Wenger's current side attempt to emulate the club's miserly defence of a bygone era to glean silverware this term.
Sunday's 2-0 victory over Crystal Palace was a 10th clean sheet at the Emirates stadium in Arsenal's last 11 games in all competitions, the only goal shipped there since October the late equaliser conceded to Everton's Gerard Deulofeu in early December. While Szczesny has excelled this term, he has benefited from the assurance of Per Mertesacker and Laurent Koscielny ahead of him, with their central defensive partnership a base upon which the team's attacking talents have built.
"Our defensive record, especially at home, has been fantastic," said Szczesny. "We know if we keep clean sheets we have got every chance of winning a game, and that's been the case. It's massive for us. As a unit, we have been together for much longer. We understand each other's games now and have had a more settled back four. Over the last couple of seasons we'd had a little bit of less luck with injuries in that part of the team, and I never played with the same back for more than two or three games.
"Now we play with the same back four, sometimes rotating the full-backs now and again, but in general we stay with the same defence. We understand each other's styles, we read each other's games, and have a very good understanding. If you want to win the championship then you have to be solid defensively. That is the most important thing. We know that clean sheets gives you the best platform to go and win games so, if we can keep a few more until the end of the season, we can get our rewards.
"I wouldn't say our defence's strength goes unnoticed: we keep winning games at home, and that is the best reward we can possibly get. Whether you need a striking force like Man City or a defence like we have had recently, I think you have to mix the both together to find the perfect team. We will see at the end of the season which one pays off."
City, who visit the Emirates Stadium in March, were one of the few teams to tear apart a defence who have shipped only 21 league goals this term, winning 6-3 at the Etihad in mid-December. "They've been incredible," said Szczesny. "They seem to score five or six goals every single game, so you've got to respect that. The teams that go to the Etihad now are sort of scared of them, it's a natural thing. You have to credit them, they've been fantastic. We just hope that we've got the edge and we will try to challenge them this season."
The London club, who will welcome Jack Wilshere back from ankle trouble at Anfield on Saturday, will be without Thomas Vermaelen for the trip to Liverpool with the Belgian expected to miss the next few weeks with a knee injury. Luis Suárez and Daniel Sturridge will test Arsenal's defensive prowess in that fixture as Wenger's team enter a daunting run of fixtures that is likely to determine the success or failure of their campaign.
"They (Suárez and Sturridge) have been fantastic, and their goalscoring record speaks for itself," added Szczesny. "They're great players. But we managed to keep a clean sheet against them at home [in a 2-0 success in November] and we'll try to do exactly the same thing away from home and hope for a result. I've never felt scared of facing anyone. We're looking forward to Saturday."
