Southampton were a club coming apart at the seams on Wednesday night after the executive chairman, Nicola Cortese, quit and left the owner desperately trying to convince the manager, Cortese, who had smoothed Markus Liebherr's £14m purchase of the south coast club in 2009, walked away having originally offered to resign to the current owner, Markus's daughter Katharina, last October once it was clear he did not share her vision for Southampton's future. His exit was accepted only after lengthy talks between the pair's legal representatives throughout Wednesday, with an early-evening statement issued that Katharina had taken over as non-executive chairwoman.
She expressed regret at the Italian-Swiss banker's decision to leave having overseen the club's rise from administration in League One to mid-table in the Premier League, though her claim that "it is business as usual" ignored the reality that Pochettino is now considering his position. It is only a year since the Argentinian took up the reins but he has made no secret of the fact he would not countenance working at St Mary's without Cortese, who had recruited him.
The manager's instinct was to quit but he was at the stadium on Wednesday night and spoke with his outgoing chairman and with the owner, with both attempting to persuade him to remain at the club. Pochettino is considering his options and is due to hold his regular pre-match press conference on Thursday, where he will be reminded of his comments last May in support of the chairman. "I would not understand staying in this role if Nicola was not here," he said then. "The person who actually called me from the start, told me about the project and put the faith in me was Nicola."
Katharina has made clear she will continue "to back and support" the manager for the foreseeable future, yet senior players who had bought into Cortese's vision to challenge for Champions League football are also understood to be dismayed at his departure. The highly rated Luke Shaw is interesting Chelsea and Manchester United, both of whom will sense an opportunity to prise away the left-back. Shaw tweeted on Wednesday night: "Gutted with that news, but would just like to thank Nicola Cortese for everything he has done for me and the club." West Ham have also not given up hope of recruiting the England forward Rickie Lambert, whom they value at around £7m, and are increasingly confident they can secure his services this month.
The relationship between the executive chairman and owner at It is understood there were also differences of opinion over how much Cortese would be due should the Liebherr Group push through a sale, all of which convinced the 45-year-old that the time had come to leave. Regardless, Katharina recognised the impact he had made at the club and had made offers described as "eye-watering" and "insane" by sources close to the negotiations in an attempt to persuade him to stay on. Those were rejected, with Cortese departing with Southampton comfortably placed in ninth.
Liebherr intends to implement a reconstitution of the board to ensure the everyday running of the club does not come down to one individual, and is looking to appoint a chief executive at the earliest opportunity. Yet, having converted £33m in loans into equity last year to demonstrate the family's continued financial commitment, the owner is well aware that the club's value has escalated over recent years, and saw Fulham bought by Shahid Khan for £150m last year.
"With great regret we have accepted the resignation of Mr Cortese," said Katharina in a statement. "He has done a wonderful job at the club and we very much wanted him to stay. A search has now begun for a successor. In the meantime, it is business as usual and we will ensure that the manager, the team and all the staff at the club have all the help and support they need."
