The England striker was afforded 32 minutes and duly scored his first "I know Jermain will score wherever he plays, whatever league he plays in," Sherwood said. "If he doesn't score he gets the hump, but he'll go home happy tonight. He warmed up on the touchline like an Olympic athlete out there, up and down like a Trojan. I saw the appetite he was showing to come on. He made my mind up for me about bringing him on." The Premier League's loss will be Major League Soccer's gain.
There are likely to be a few more reminders before Defoe departs for Canada at the end of February, with his impact required here, even if Their clearest was a penalty born of Delaney's leggy burst from deep and slipped pass to Marouane Chamakh, with Mousa Dembélé's clumsy challenge yielding the foul. The striker indicated he wished to take the kick, though Jason Puncheon had scored from the spot in his team's last league outing, on New Year's Day, and took responsibility again. He ambled up to the ball, indecision gripping, and sliced it horrendously high and wide. The winger is still waiting for his loan deal from Southampton to be made permanent; this miss was untimely.
Had their delivery thereafter been more accurate, Palace might still have flourished while Sherwood flapped in livid disbelief on the sidelines. But too many crosses were over-hit and, when Palace did gain sight of goal, their finishing was awry. Chamakh, who would be denied late on by Hugo Lloris, might have scored from close range, only for his shot to strike Yannick Bolasie. Adlène Guedioura, meanwhile, battered the ball just wide from distance. This has been the story of Palace's season, and bite must be recruited this month if they are to survive."We'd been taken a bit by surprise by Palace," said Sherwood, who lost Kyle Walker to a calf strain. "But in the second half we matched them for desire and effort, and our quality shone through."
The lead gave Spurs the opportunity to dictate the tempo, Palace's energy levels having dipped, with Eriksen revelling. Defoe's cameo added to their firepower, the England forward instantly menacing. He had already belted one shot beyond the far post when he escaped the linesman's flag to give the scoreline an air of comfort.
