David Sullivan and David Gold had reacted to Sunday's thrashing by the Championship club Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup third round by publishing an open letter to supporters in which they acknowledged the strains under which Allardyce has been operating. They added that the club's manager since 2011 had "not lost his ambition or desire and is committed to making West Ham a great Premier League club".
The manager welcomed that unsolicited backing but, with his team 19th in the table and without a Premier League win since November as they address the first leg of their semi-final at the Etihad stadium, he recognises there will be no job security unless the team's slump is arrested. "In the end, we all know what happens if you don't get results as a manager," he said. "But I'm here. I'm pushing the club forward with the help of everybody here at the club, from top to bottom.
"We've had a very good success in a short period of time. We're having a very poor experience at the moment. [Everything] depends on what results I get from now until … well, over the next few weeks or games. We are in a critical period playing in this cup game where we want to try and go out and give a great account of ourselves, to try and give the fans and ourselves a great day out at Wembley."
Allardyce, who hopes to have West Ham's record signing Andy Carroll fit enough to return to his match-day squad in the next two weeks, is the only manager retained from last summer by any of the top flight's bottom five clubs, a turnover which reflects the anxiety in boardrooms at the prospect of dropping out of the money-flushed division. "Our owners' track record proves they haven't been too rushed into the decisions they make," he said. "Over the last 18 to 20 years, they've given their managers a good chance and stuck by them when things are not going so well.
"But look at this season alone: the reactions are getting quicker and quicker and quicker due to the impatience throughout the game for success. Success isn't built overnight. Success has to be built over a sustained period of time. There are difficulties within that time that you experience and you have to try to get through, and history tells you continually changing managers doesn't mean success. But I'm realistic to know I have to get results, particularly quickly from my point of view, as a manager."
