Rogers, a United States international, played five games for Leeds after signing from Columbus Crew in January 2012. Injuries nullified his impact and he left the club a year later by mutual consent and retired from the game, subsequently becoming only the second gay footballer in Britain to come out in public. Yet he returned to the game in May and signed for Los Angeles Galaxy, David Beckham's former club, with whom he will start the new Major League Soccer season in the new year.
The 26-year-old is now a leading light in Beyond "it", which seeks to raise money and awareness for nonprofit organisations that fight labels and stereotypes in society. Leeds became the first club in the country to take part in Stonewall's diversity champions programme to promote greater equality in the sport earlier this month, with the Championship side now the Beyond "it" flagship European supporter. The initiative's message will be promoted heavily within the ground and on match day merchandise on Saturday, and around the local community through the work of the Leeds United Foundation.
"The club is very much a family and we're supporting Robbie, one of our ex players," said the Leeds managing director, David Haigh. "We were the first football club to be a Stonewall diversity champion, and we're proud to be the first football team in Europe to be involved with Beyond "it". The message will be very visible within the ground, with a text-alert line for people to contact if they hear incidents of discrimination in or around Elland Road, but it's not just about policing. This is about education, too. The Leeds United Foundation goes out to schools, businesses and universities across the county and beyond, educating people not just about football and sport, but equality and tolerance."
Beyond "it" is also seeking to distribute a magnetic green bar, designed to be worn on shirts or lapels, that Rogers hopes spectators, athletes and commentators will wear at the winter Olympics in Russia, who have come under fierce criticism for passing national laws banning "gay propaganda". Barack Obama sent Moscow a clear message about its treatment of gays and lesbians this week by appointing Billie Jean King, a 39-times grand slam title winner, and the ice hockey player Caitlin Cahow to their delegation to attend the opening and closing ceremonies in Sochi. Both are openly gay.
Rogers welcomed the appointments and hopes competitors will wear the Beyond "it" green bands after talk earlier this year of a potential boycott of the games. "A lot of people wanted to boycott but all these athletes have been preparing, putting their heart and soul into everything," the footballer said. "In my experience, the best way to touch people's lives was to go back to the sport and be a positive role model. To be yourself. These athletes need to be protected by the International Olympic Committee, but by making a statement and being who they are, winning medals, being present in the village … that would send a stronger message than boycotting, in my opinion."
