Television footage appeared to capture Wilshere raising a finger towards the crowd at the Etihad Stadium during the second half of Saturday's 6-3 defeat to Manchester City. The incident went unnoticed by the referee Martin Atkinson and his match officials but, having been caught on video, was assessed by the FA and referred to the governing body's three-man panel of former referees.
They determined that the offence, if it had been seen at the time, would have constituted an offensive gesture, which carries a two-match ban. If they do appeal, the case will be heard by an independent commission on Thursday, who would have the power to reduce the ban. However, while that may offer Arsenal some hope that the player may be available for the trip to Upton Park on Boxing Day, the 21-year-old will almost certainly miss Chelsea's visit to the Emirates Stadium on Monday. Indeed, the Arsenal manager, Arsène Wenger, acknowledged post-match that: "If [Jack]did it and he is banned then we will have to accept it."
Wilshere appeared to raise a finger towards the crowd after 68 minutes after disagreeing with a decision to award City a goalkick. The charge has been lodged under the FA's recently adopted pilot project for "not seen" incidents in Premier League matches. "If an incident has not been seen by the match officials, a three-man panel will be asked by the FA to review it and advise what, if any action, they believe the match referee should have taken had it been witnessed at the time," said the FA in a statement. "For an FA charge to follow, all three panel members must agree it is a sending-off offence. In this instance the panel was unanimous."
Previous incidents have prompted only one-match sanctions, most notably when Luis Suárez was photographed raising a finger to Fulham fans as he left the pitch at Craven Cottage two years ago.
On that occasion there was no video footage of the alleged offence, so the FA took witness statements to accompany the pictorial evidence, with the regulatory committee ultimately deciding a one-match ban and a £20,000 fine, together with a warning as to his future conduct, were sufficient.
Wilfried Zaha also received a one-match ban last season after a similar gesture aimed at away supporters during Crystal Palace's 2-2 draw with Leeds at Selhurst Park, an incident that was similarly not caught on video. However, Blackpool's Tom Ince received the standard two-match sanction after gesturing at the referee, unseen by the official at the time, in a Capital One Cup tie at Preston in August after the offence was on film.
