Police have arrested six people in connection with a second investigation into spot-fixing in English football after a former Premier League defender allegedly told an undercover reporter he had been involved in rigging matches in return for money.
The National Crime Agency confirmed six people were in custody after it acted upon information passed to it by the Sun on Sunday. The newspaper reported that an undercover investigator had met the former Reading and Portsmouth player Sam Sodje, who had allegedly claimed he could arrange for Championship footballers to get themselves booked in games for cash payments.
The 34-year-old was filmed describing how he had twice punched an opponent, Oldham Athletic's Jose Baxter, while playing for Portsmouth in a League One match last February as he sought to receive a red card in exchange for £70,000. Asked on Sunday to reflect on the dismissal, the then Portsmouth manager Guy Whittingham told the BBC: "When you see it in the cold light of day afterwards, and you see what he's done, you can't fathom out why he's done it."
Sodje also claimed in the video, which was filmed secretly, that he had arranged for another player to be paid £30,000 for earning a yellow card in a Championship match, that he could rig Premier League games and was even preparing to fix matches at the World Cup finals in Brazil.
Portsmouth, who released Sodje at the end of last season, said they were "shocked and saddened" by the claims. "Match-fixing of any type goes to the heart of the integrity of the game," said a spokesman for the League Two club. "The player in question no longer plays for the club and we have not been contacted by the authorities, but of course we would co-operate fully with any inquiry.". Sodje could not be reached for comment.
The newspaper reported that Sodje's brother, the Tranmere forward Akpo Sodje, had allegedly said he would be prepared to be paid to be booked. Tranmere said: "As this is an ongoing investigation the club will make no further comment at this time."
The report also detailed how the Oldham player Cristian Montaño allegedly failed to get a yellow card in return for money in a match against Wolves on 22 October and allegedly offered to take part in another rigging incident. Oldham said: "The club will commence an immediate internal investigation to establish all the relevant facts of the case. The club is co-operating with other agencies in this matter and cannot comment on specific facts at this stage."
A spokesman for the NCA said: "An active NCA investigation is now under way and we are working closely with the Football Association and the Gambling Commission. Six people are in custody and are being questioned by NCA officers. We cannot comment further at this stage." The Football Association, the Football League and the Gambling Commission have indicated they will assist police in their investigation.
The NCA is conducting a separate investigation into an alleged international Two other men, Chann Sankaran, 33, from Hastings, East Sussex, and Krishna Sanjey Ganeshan, 43, from Singapore, were charged last month with plotting to defraud bookmakers and will also appear in court this week.
The Professional Footballers' Association said in a statement: "These allegations, if proven, unfortunately demonstrate the real issue football faces in terms of corruption and highlights the necessity of the work carried out by the PFA and other stakeholders in the game in educating players of these risks.
"We take the issue of integrity very seriously and will continue in our efforts to eradicate this evil from our game."
Marcus Gayle, the manager of Conference South team Staines Town, has claimed his players were offered match-fixing bribes three weeks ago. The former Wimbledon and Watford player told BT Sport he was furious when he discovered the approach, which was made to one of his players by telephone.
Gayle said: "We reported the incident straight away to the FA. That shows we have done the right thing. Our players are absolutely furious. I never thought match-fixing was possible but now I have changed my mind for obvious reasons, now I am convinced it's all over the place, at least that's how it appears to be to me. After what has happened at my club I am angry and I want to stand up for the integrity of the game, even if that means standing up alone, so be it.
"As a club I believe we have done the right thing reporting it to the FA and I am sure they will be passing on that information to the police. We reported it to the FA 24 hours after I found out about it. It does worry me just how much is going on in the game at the moment, and I am sure it is far more than people think."
