José Mourinho has suggested Terry, who turns 33 on Saturday, is set to start his 15th Premier League game of the season at Stoke City after form and fitness issues limited him to only 14 appearances in the division last term. The centre-half scored on his 400th top-flight outing last weekend and has regained the authority and confidence of old, benefiting from regular breaks during the various international windows over the autumn.
Mourinho has already conceded that Terry's self-esteem took a battering last year and, while no talks are scheduled as yet over extending Terry's stay at the club, the manager suggested the defender could remain beyond the summer.
"At this age, it's a thing of going year after year," said Mourinho when asked about Terry's capability of emulating Giggs, who turned 40 last week. "At this age, sometimes players reach a level of stability where they become the same. I look at Zanetti in 2008 and Zanetti in 2012, and he was the same. These guys have to enjoy the moment and play with the same ambition.
"They can't be worried about contracts, or time left on their contract, or one more pound or less pound in their contract, but enjoy it to the last day. When they play this way, it's no problem.
"John's self-esteem had been affected last season. He was a bit affected. I think he felt, in a quiet way, the pain of doubts about him. So I told him I'm not here to help him. I'm not here to give him anything he doesn't deserve. But I said: 'I believe if you work really hard from day one, I think you have a chance to play more than you did last season.' I was far from thinking he'd play the first 14 matches consecutively, but he's doing well, working and behaving well, and I'm pleased with him."
Terry is likely to be rested for next week's visit of Steaua Bucharest in the Champions League, a game where Ashley Cole is expected to return to the first team.
"At a certain moment, clubs also have to care about a style of play," said Mourinho when asked about Stoke under Mark Hughes. "They also have to care about the way you sell your product. They did well to change a philosophy that was giving points but was not giving a future. They're a little different now. Not so much. They play better football but they keep many things from the past. I don't think they are too different but they're still difficult, that's for sure."
