Given the manner in which Luis Su치rez is illuminating the Premier League and the waves being made across the Channel by Edinson Cavani at Paris St-Germain, Oscar Tab치rez's side are streetwise, strong and boast thrilling quality throughout their lineup, from the goalkeeper Fernando Muslera to the centre-half Diego Lugano (vastly experienced with 91 caps if, as yet, under-used at West Bromwich Albion this season) to the emerging Abel Hern치ndez of Palermo.
Concentrating merely on the threat posed by Su치rez and Cavani would be risky. They will relish exploiting South American conditions against two European sides, and it is not outlandish for them to aspire to emulate their triumph in this tournament in 1950, when they beat the hosts in the final at the Maracana. 
The Liverpool striker propelled this team through qualification, with 11 goals in his 14 appearances. One need only see how devastating he has been this season to realise stopping him is easier said than done. He might have a point or two to prove to the Football Association, as well.

At least England know what to expect from the Capable of scorching allcomers when the mood takes him, though it is his unpredictability that perhaps marks him out as dangerous. Germany had not anticipated the brilliance of his semi-final display at Euro 2012, and yet this is still a young player prone to tantrums and, as against the Czechs in qualification, disciplinary issues. Whatever happens, he will be entertaining.



The Costa Ricans would appear to be the section's weakest link given that they have never progressed beyond the last 16 at the finals though they retain the ability to shock and in these conditions, will be awkward opposition. Jorge Luis Pinto, their Colombian coach, is a shrewd organiser with experience gained at 15 clubs over a 30-year career. Only ever treats the Premier League to flashes of his undoubted class but with more time on the ball than he is granted at Fulham he may showcase his abilities more readily. His form as a playmaker wreaked havoc in qualifying and he orchestrates the attacking approach.
