Southampton's blistering start to the season is in danger of juddering to a halt as Christmas approaches. If defeats at Arsenal and Chelsea might have been grudgingly accepted, evenanticipated, then surrendering an unbeaten home record to This rip-roaring contest was decided with a goal of brutal brilliance. Villa had twice led despite Southampton's 77% monopoly of possession only to be pegged back by headers when, 10 minutes from time, Fabian Delph darted forward to dispatch a thunderous winner past Paulo Gazzaniga from distance.
Southampton's mood turned ugly after the final whistle. Dani Osvaldo had already been booked when, with a third successive defeat confirmed, he had to be separated from Villa's players by his manager, Mauricio Pochettino, as the teams left the pitch. "It's only normal in football when you're angry," said Pochettino. "We're experiencing the other side of football, a negative side, because we're in a bad run at the moment. I'm not going to deny that. Emotion gets the better of you, so it's normal there were temper tantrums at the end."
Those scenes detracted from a thrilling contest. Artur Boruc was also missed, with Gazzaniga uncertain on a first start in over a year, as was Morgan Schneiderlin. The goalkeeper was unable to prevent Libor Kozak's header beating his attempted save just after the hour-mark. To add to Southampton's problems Victor Wanyama and Nathaniel Clyne picked up injuries, the former withdrawn at the break and the excellent full-back hurting a hamstring having set up Rodriguez's goal and made regular in-roads down Villa's left flank.
For Villa, their manager, Paul Lambert, who had dropped Christian Benteke, could relish finishing he described as "lethal". Agbonlahor's goal was "world-class". "With that speed and power, no one can catch Gabi, and the third goal was unbelievable," he said.
Delph has flourished this season and, having already fed Agbonlahor for his side's first, he then decided the match in spectacular style with his first 