Tony Pulis has had his immediate effect. This match was excruciating to endure for Palace at times, with the home side's inability to retain possession as the nerves took hold inviting pressure from a But there is steel suddenly in Palace where, recently, they had cracked too easily. Full-time brought a third clean sheet in four matches and a wave of relief swept round the arena. Cardiff City, the side currently just above the relegation zone, visit on Saturday. Belief is starting to stir in south London.
Pulis had his buzzwords prepared for the post-match assessment. "The resilience, the commitment, good organisation...," he offered. "The players have been fantastic from the minute I walked in, their attitude and commitment absolutely wonderful. We need to strengthen the side and bring a little bit more quality in but we need to be in the race by the time the window opens to do that." Results like this will keep them in contention to compete in the market.
The match-winner was an unlikely one. Marouane Chamakh, who felt under-used on loan at West Ham for the second half of last season, had scored only once since his arrival from Arsenal in the summer. However, when he sent a downward header beyond Kevin Nolan and Mark Noble on the goal-line three minutes before the break, it meant he had contributed a quarter of his team's He had worked his own space from Mohamed Diamé as West Ham dawdled, after Barry Bannan had scuffed a corner towards the near post. When the ball was returned to the Scot his second centre was fizzed across with precision and the Moroccan had his reward. Sam Allardyce, the West Ham manager, deemed it "the most ridiculous goal, from our point of view, that I've seen for a very long time".
had come against the tide, West Ham having dominated for long periods only to be undermined by their own profligacy. They were fortunate to benefit from Palace's wastefulness thereafter as a flurry of opportunities early in the second half were passed up to guarantee the nerve-jangling finale.
First Jason Puncheon's attempt was deflected on to a post by James Collins's lunge, then Kagisho Dikgacoi thumped a free header from Bannan's centre over the bar while West Ham were still recovering from their earlier escape.
It was a bad miss, though Pulis was apoplectic when, within seconds, Cameron Jerome, sent through on the nod by his captain, Mile Jedinak, beyond Collins, was foiled byJussi Jaaskelainen. Failure to convert that chance reflected the confidence of a striker who has not scored in 21 matches. Jerome's work-rate was admirable. Palace could do with his radar clicking in.
As it was, they were spared. The visitors could curse their own failings in front of goal before the break, the finger pointed at Diamé for flicking a free header over the bar from Stewart Downing's cross and at Nolan for fluffing his connection after Noble had scooped a free-kick over the defensive wall.
Allardyce held his head in his hands at that miss, though frustration boiled over after the break when the referee, Lee Mason, deemed Joey O'Brien had pulled back Chamakh at the far post just before Downing converted.
The tangle appeared to have involved tugs from both players, though Allardyce was so livid he avoided his post-match duties, sending his assistant Neil McDonald to air his grievance. "Sam's still a bit livid after the performance, not just our players but the officials," said Allardyce's No2. "The fourth official couldn't say where the foul was committed."
His players' exasperation culminated in James Tomkins battering a loose ball inadvertently against Dean Moxey after the final whistle to prompt a mêlée, with Ravel Morrison running 40 yards to intervene and raise his hands into Joel Ward's face. Mason spied that offence but flashed only a yellow card, for which the youngster may consider himself fortunate, though he will miss Saturday's trip to Liverpool as it was his fifth caution. While the players were separated Pulis had already sprinted down the touchline and away. This was merely a start. Confidence is creeping back.
