Rene Meulensteen expects to be granted funding by the Meulensteen, who was initially recruited as head coach last month, was given sole responsibility for the first-team following the departure of his compatriot, Martin Jol. Meulensteen , has spoken at length with the chief executive, Alistair Mackintosh, and has made no secret of his desire to recruit to bolster a side who have suffered five successive league defeats to drop below the cut-off.
There is an acceptance within the hierarchy at Craven Cottage that additions will have to be made to fire the team's survival attempt, with the implications of relegation to the Championship all too obvious. Jol had operated within a relatively tight budget over the tail-end of Mohamed al-Fayed's stewardship before Khan's takeover last summer, and his net spend over his two-and-a-half-year spell, a period encompassing five transfer windows, had been only around £4m.
While Bryan Ruiz had cost £10.6m from FC Twente, and Dimitar Berbatov had been recruited from Manchester United, Jol's outlay in the summer was limited to the arrival of Sascha Riether, Scott Parker and Elsad Zverotic on permanent deals, while Adel Taarabt and Darren Bent joined on loan.
"Everyone needs to realise we must invest," Meulensteen, 49, told the BBC. "We need to look how we can strengthen this squad to ensure Fulham stay in the The Dutchman, who had spoken at length on the telephone with the departing Jol after the axe fell, oversaw the first-team's training session at Motspur Park on Monday ahead of the visit of Tottenham Hotspur to Craven on Wednesday having already re-jigged his technical staff following his promotion. Jonathan Hill, a former academy youth coach at Manchester United, has been appointed first-team coach.
Hill has since enjoyed a period as technical director with the Jordanian Football Association, overseeing youth teams from under-8s to under-20s, before recent spells at Manchester City and Tromso. Kit Symons, formerly the under-21s development team manager, will also be assisting Meulensteen with the senior coaching alongside his duties with the second-string. Billy McKinlay, Michael Lindeman and the former manager's brother, Cornelis Jol, have all departed the club as part of the shake-up.
Meulensteen will be challenged in his new role regardless of the level of funding he receives in January given his relative lack of managerial experience at the top level, with his appointment greeted with skepticism in some quarters.
"The way they are playing at the moment, they are looking in real trouble," said the former Fulham captain, Danny Murphy, speaking on talkSPORT. "I just hope he has the capability because it doesn't matter how good a coach you are: when you have to manage players it is a different ball game.
"There are plenty of candidates out there with more experience than him, so I'm not sure. He will have learnt a lot from Sir Alex Ferguson, how can you not? But you are talking about dealing with different players. You're not talking about training with some of the best players in Europe day in, day out. You're talking about trying to motivate players that aren't playing so well. It's a different job."
The division's bottom club, Crystal Palace, have confirmed that their captain, Mile Jedinak, has signed a new contract with the club that will extend the Australia international's stay at Selhurst Park to 2017. The new Palace manager, Tony Pulis, had been keen to recruit the 29-year-old midfielder for Stoke City last season having impressed in an FA Cup third round tie between the clubs, but will now work with Australia's player of the year for the foreseeable future in south London.
