Chelsea have qualified for the knockout phase of the There was an admission from Mourinho in the aftermath that he had erred in his selection, that fatigue had undermined his team's efforts for all that Basel had been excellent to merit their win. There had been a solitary change from Saturday's powerful victory at West Ham United, and yet It is the inconsistency that must infuriate the management. Where Mourinho's team had been so dominant in prevailing at Upton Park, they merely drifted here apparently unable to rouse themselves. They were devoid of rhythm and zest going forward, Uefa's statistics confirming they had not mustered a single shot on target all evening. Frank Lampard's scuffed and deflected free-kick, which was cleared away by Ivan Ivanov, was about as close as they came, though the locals were never unnerved.
This was only a second blank in 25 Champions League games, the last of which had been a year ago and that traumatic 3-0 defeat at Juventus from which Roberto Di Matteo, a European Cup winner six months previously, never recovered. They exited this competition with 10 points last term. Chelsea have progressed with nine this time, even if they must beat Steaua Bucharest next month to ensure they top a mediocre group. Bang goes any hope of using that occasion as an opportunity to rest weary limbs and allow a second-string a run-out.
December boasts nine fixtures and, on this evidence, too many of this squad will struggle to play consecutive games. "Clearly I've got signs of fatigue and players who have trouble playing two matches in a few days," said Mourinho. "That will push me for sure to make a different kind of decision. That's obvious."
Weariness, both physical and mental, clearly played some part in his team's anaemic display here but They hustled and bustled through central midfield and fed their free-flowing wingers and full-backs. Salah, so menacing when terrorising Ashley Cole in London, tore at Branislav Ivanovic and César Azpilicueta as he drifted from flank to flank. Valentin Stocker was a nuisance, Kay Voser and Taulant Xhaka marauding forward at will. Witnessing a display this effervescent it is mystifying to consider Basel had failed to beat Steaua, the group's whipping boys, home or away.
Cech kept them at bay for a while. His best save was from Salah, pushing away a vicious shot as he tumbled to the floor and the ball reared up from the turf. The tip behind was outstanding improvisation but merely maintained the excellence already offered to deny Fabian Frei, Xhaka and Salah from distance. When he was beaten, John Mikel Obi cleared Ivanov's toe-poke from the goal-line, but Chelsea would not survive unscathed.
The visitors had just flung on Kevin de Bruyne near the end when their rearguard switched off and allowed Salah to charge beyond Ivanovic and into the area. Cech darted from his line but the finish was crisp and accurate, over the goalkeeper and into the far corner. Basel now sit second and, should they avoid defeat against Schalke in the last game, their own interest in the competition will be prolonged into the new year.
Chelsea, of course, still aspire to regain this trophy though considerable improvement will be required to make that feasible. They had lost Samuel Eto'o to "a muscular injury" after an awkward fall just before the interval, the striker to be scanned back at Cobham with Mourinho braced for more bad news. Fabian Schär, the home captain, was rarely troubled either by the veteran or his replacement, Fernando Torres, with the composure demonstrated by Basel's young centre-half likely to have the scouts gushing over his qualities. For Chelsea, there was little here from which to draw encouragement other than progress. The booming message to be issued to the rest of Europe, that this team is back in contention, will have to wait.
