The former Stoke manager, who left the Britannia Stadium after seven successful years in the summer, will take on the challenge of hoisting Palace from the foot of the Premier League and will be active in the January transfer market.
Pulis has already made clear that the playing staff needs urgent strengthening if Palace are to stand any chance of staying up. Up to five new players may be added to a squad who have already undergone an overhaul since gaining promotion last May.
Confirmation of his arrival will conclude a frantic month at Selhurst Park following Ian Holloway's departure. Pulis had been earmarked by Holloway as the natural choice to replace him and was interviewed early in the process by the co-chairman, Steve Parish.
Palace chose to explore alternative options, taking soundings from a number of candidates from Martin O'Neill to Chris Coleman, Dan Petrescu to Iain Dowie, before returning to the 55-year-old earlier this week. There was a second interview on Tuesday, after Pulis returned from a short break in Portugal, at which he made plain his vision for the club's immediate future and won round the owners in the process.
Pulis will sign an initial two-and-a-half-year contract, having always insisted he wanted this to be a long-term project to extend well beyond the end of the season, whether top-flight survival was achieved or not. He is expected to bring in his own coaching staff, including the former Palace player Dave Kemp who worked with him at Stoke.
There is understood to be a hefty bonus included should Pulis manage to keep the side with four points from 11 games in the Premier League, with his salary next season likely to reflect the division in which Palace are playing. He was also seeking guaranteed that, should the club be relegated, money from parachute payments would be made available to strengthen once more and fuel an immediate challenge for promotion.
The caretaker manager, Keith Millen, will take charge of the team at the KC Stadium.
