A goal in either half from the outstanding Barcelona forward Alexis Sánchez deflated an experimental English line-up and checked momentum following last month's heartening qualification for next summer's World Cup finals. Hodgson had handed debuts to three players, and game-time to the likes of Phil Jones and Ross Barkley, only for Chile, ranked two places below "There was almost an entire team of our players who didn't play, but the experimenting does not totally explain the result because we played against a very good team tonight," said Hodgson. "We learned a lot. It wasn't easy chasing that game. We are fully aware that the team needs work. We hope to learn from what went on tonight and we hope to learn again on Tuesday. We will try to do a better job and send our fans home happy. It's not all doom and gloom. It's how you deal with defeats and we'll retain a sense of perspective.
"There will be a lot of players on Tuesday who didn't play tonight, so should be fresh. Hopefully, having watched the game, they'll be aware of how important it will be to give a good performance. I took a chance, ran a risk with the debuts, in the hope it would go our way. It didn't. I have to accept that responsibility. As for the boos, that's part of the game today. Fans don't accept defeats or want them. Who does? We don't want them either.
"But there aren't many games I see played today where, if the home team has lost, there isn't some sort of booing. I'll not criticise our fans. They were disappointed tonight that we couldn't keep our momentum and performances going, so they're entitled to show their frustration. But they'll show a measure of perspective, I'm sure."
Southampton's Adam Lallana and Jay Rodriguez, together with Fraser Forster of Celtic, earned their first caps and, while the Saints' captain Lallana did show flashes of his quality, all three found the experience an eye-opener. "It's going to be harsh to make too many judgments on them," said Hodgson. "They did come into a team where a lot of the players around them weren't necessarily the most experienced, either. And we were playing a team where even our more experienced players, or those who had played more in the qualifiers, would have found it more difficult anyway. "But we learned a lot about what it's like to play against South American opposition, how good they are at sucking you towards their goalkeeper who manages then to ping 40-50 yard balls on to people's toes. That was probably the best passing display from a goalkeeper I've ever seen. They had a lot of players with 40 to 70 caps, and they've been together a while and know how to play with each other. We need to keep a balance on the whole thing, even if taking positives from defeats is always difficult. I didn't expect to lose. I didn't think the team I selected would lose the game, but we did. All I can do is remedy areas of the team which we can improve with an eye on the Germany game on Tuesday."
Joe Hart will start that match, the Manchester City goalkeeper having missed his last four club games after a recent dip in form. Jones will miss the match with a groin injury that requires a scan on Saturday, while Rickie Lambert will be assessed when the players reconvene at their Hertfordshire hotel on Sunday evening. "We didn't need a reality check," said Frank Lampard, who captained the team and was presented with a golden cap before kick-off to mark his century of appearances. "We know that we are not on the moon, and we are not terrible. We are somewhere in the middle. But we've got another game against top-class opposition on Tuesday and we have to do better."
Germany will arrive having drawn 1-1 against Italy in Milan, despite hitting the woodwork three times en route, with England apparently seeking an immediate response to this setback. "The lads were very unhappy, sad that a good run has come to an end and to lose that run on home soil," added Hodgson. "But it's important that, having been knocked down, they pick themselves up again. It's a big game on Tuesday. We need to play better if we're going to beat top teams like Chile and Germany."
