Picking the ball out of the net seven minutes into his debut, with virtually his first touch, did not represent the most auspicious of starts for the new boy and this was, perhaps inevitably, a rather nervy display. Forster pushed another attempt, from Jean Beausejour, dangerously back into play and turned another low centre, from Eugenio Mena, into his six-yard box and was fortunate not to be punished. He could at least take heart from the spring from his line to exploit the Wigan forward's heavy first touch as a second goal beckoned just after the half-hour mark, but the Celtic goalkeeper was tentative, his kicking rather haphazard and his understanding with those centre halves ahead of him rather limited. But there were no major errors and he had little chance with Chile's second goal at the death.
The Southampton duo boasted a solitary Under-21 cap each before graduating to senior level here and, as two prongs in a narrow trident, had contrasting fortunes. Lallana was arguably one of England's brighter attackers, drawing saves from Claudio Bravo and seeing another low shot deflected wide of the far post after neat approach play. He was energetic and industrious and, while occasionally jittery, did not look out of place, particularly in tandem with Wayne Rooney when opportunities arose. For Rodriguez the reality was less palatable. Peripheral at first, then anxious when he finally sought out involvement, he seemed gripped by apprehension. One weak shot summed it up, his best work limited to defensive covering. Auditions such as this are cruel but, if this was sink or swim, he rather sank.
The Manchester United player has long craved an opportunity to feature at centre-half. His time in his favoured position had previously been limited to six minutes under Roy Hodgson's management and this was a chance to prove he should be considered a third option to Gary Cahill and Phil Jagielka. The problem was that his partnership with Cahill looked so experimental. The pair were flustered whenever Chile's bright attackers scuttled at them, a new-look England's dilemma with Wilshere revolves less around whether he should play and more around whether he can. It was encouraging to have the Arsenal player back in the side after his latest bout of ankle trouble and he operated effectively both as a makeshift No10 and then in a deeper role once James Milner had been withdrawn. England craved him on the ball more often, so well did they tick when he built up a head of steam in possession. Yet the 71 minutes managed here will most likely represent his only involvement in these two friendlies, and doubts surely linger as to whether the 21-year-old would be able to feature heavily in a tournament. His temperament was tested here by the Chileans, one altercation with Beausejour in front of the referee in particular catching the eye. That, in itself, might be cause for some concern.
The other aspirants were offered only minor roles, thrust into the fray with England trailing and struggling to make an impact. Chris Smalling, another United player to have been handicapped by his own versatility, replaced Jones and was promptly butted in the neck by Gonzalo Jara. Jermain Defoe, the only England striker to function at the last World Cup but a Europa League player with Tottenham Hotspur these days, was bright in his initial foray and then starved of the ball as he sought rhythm. Jordan Henderson and Ross Barkley would hope for greater involvement in Tuesday's game against Germany, with the latter in particular a player of real interest. He was introduced as the playmaker here, with Rooney shifting to the left, yet Chile were too canny in the duels that ensued. He will eventually flourish in this side, but this was a brief education.
