Forster may excel regularly for Celtic in the Champions League, thwarting opponents such as Lionel Messi and Barcelona, but he remains something of an unknown to English eyes. Formerly at Newcastle, the 25-year-old's experience south of the border is limited to loan spells with Norwich, Bristol Rovers and Stockport. At some stage this will be an opportunity to demonstrate his abilities on the international stage with a view to proving himself as Joe Hart's deputy. He still has to convince the management that he is worthy of such elevation: he has a reputation as an excellent shot-stopper, but is happiest when anchored to his line and does not always dominate his six-yard box. People are dismissive of the standard of the Scottish Premiership, suggesting he is not tested regularly enough to warrant inclusion. Certainly, he will do well to dislodge Ben Foster once the West Bromwich Albion goalkeeper returns to fitness, and John Ruddy, who will presumably also play 45 minutes on Friday and benefits from working on a daily basis with the It is a little more than two years since Jones impressed in central midfield as England overcame the reigning world and European champions, Spain, in a friendly, and yet the 21-year-old is still seeking regular involvement. There have been untimely injuries, though the youngster has arguably been undermined by his own versatility. How else does one explain how someone heralded by Sir Alex Ferguson as potentially "one of Manchester United's greatest", as a modern-day Franco Baresi by Fabio Capello, and by Sir Bobby Charlton as reminiscent of Duncan Edwards, remains a fringe player whose optimum position is unknown? Jones considers himself a centre-half, even if he has had to be patient to make any impression there at all at United given the influence of Nemanja Vidic and Rio Ferdinand. His versatility will surely see him included in the squad for Brazil. Yet he will aspire to travelling as under-study elect for Gary Cahill or Phil Jagielka, the first-choice centre-halves.
This has been the teenager's breakthrough season at Everton, the midfielder having benefited from loan spells at Sheffield Wednesday and Leeds. He had a promising debut back in September, albeit against a fragile Moldova, and he impressed in training ahead of the critical ties with Montenegro and Poland even if Roy Hodgson chose not to risk him in the team. Since then he has been rested by Everton on occasion, which may ensure he is fresh to play his part against Chile and Germany over the next five days. Barkley would relish that free role behind a striker, running at back-tracking defenders and testing the goalkeeper from range. He would offer England something different, allowing Wayne Rooney to operate in the lone forward role and benefiting from experienced players at his back. This is a player of real promise and England's wildcard of the moment.
The Southampton forward's inclusion was surprising not least because he has a solitary Under-21s cap to his name – which involved 30 minutes against Italy two years ago as England lost 1-0 in Empoli. But he will play a part against Chile and has a chance to show he can operate effectively as a wide attacker, possibly on the left in Danny Welbeck's absence. Rooney, Daniel Sturridge and Welbeck will all travel to Brazil, fitness permitting. If Roy Hodgson wants a quintet of forwards in his 23-man squad, as seems likely, then Rodriguez will presumably go head-to-head with his club-mate Rickie Lambert, Andy Carroll and Jermain Defoe in search of one of the remaining berths. There may be merit in selecting Lambert and Rodriguez, club-mates on the same wavelength, though the pair still have plenty to prove. Given how little game time remains on this stage before the squad is announced, Rodriguez's impact must be immediate.
A player whose progression up through the leagues with Southampton has been heartening, and whose displays recently at the south coast club have been excellent warranting his inclusion in the squad. Lallana has been involved on the periphery at this level before, having been called up for the World Cup qualifying draw with Ukraine in September 2012. He did not make his debut that night but, at 25, will feel he is now coming into his prime. Midfield is an area where England boast real competition for places, but maintaining the form typified by that scintillating goal against Hull City last Saturday would thrust Lallana firmly into Hodgson's thinking. He can be both supplier and scorer, operating in any of that trio of positions behind the forward where his clever movement makes him such a menace for opposing defenders. The Southampton story, as a whole, is uplifting but their captain personifies their rise.
