Joe Hart has received unlikely backing from a Premier League rival, the Arsenal goalkeeper Wojciech Szczesny, as he seeks to recover from a recent dip in form while with England over the international window and reclaim his first-team place at He has been omitted from his club side's past four fixtures following a number of high-profile errors and will sit out England's friendly against Chile on Friday as Roy Hodgson is eager to assess the credentials of Celtic's Fraser Forster and John Ruddy of Norwich City as back-up to the Manchester City goalkeeper. Hart is expected to start next Tuesday's game against Germany at Wembley and the 26-year-old is still considered as first choice by the England management staff.
Hart and Szczesny are friends, two of a young generation of goalkeepers making their mark in the Premier League and enduring the same pitfalls en route. The Pole, who played against England at the national stadium in last month's decisive World Cup qualifier – in which Hart kept his seventh clean sheet of the qualification campaign – was rested himself by Arsenal last season after enduring his own slump in form, but has returned stronger for the experience to help his side forge a lead at the top of the Premier League table.
"The fact there is a new generation of keepers makes it more exciting because you know the younger goalkeepers, even when they are very good at the age, they are still going to have ups and downs," said Szczesny. "You have seen [this] with "Look at Petr Cech and he has been amazingly consistent over the last four or five years but, at 25 or 26, you don't have that. So it makes it more exciting. But I always support all the young players in the Premier League, especially the goalkeepers. It is always good to have a bit of banter with them at the end of the game rather than just going up to someone and thinking: 'Do I call you "sir"?' They have all been doing really well. Simon Mignolet I thought was the goalkeeper of the season last year, David de Gea won it, but Joe Hart I rate as one of the best in the world.
"Forget the last couple of weeks where it has been very difficult for him and he has been dropped. I suppose everybody has got to go through that. Over the last couple of years he was the most consistent and one of the best – it is hard to say the best – goalkeepers in the world and I am sure that he will prove that to people even though he has had some difficult times."
Szczesny had been a virtual ever-present for two years at "You have got time to sort things out," added Szczesny. "A lot of aspects come into the game of the top goalkeepers. You can become too professional, if you like: you get too serious about things and try too much, and that can backfire. So it is very important to relax and maybe have a bit of time away from the pressure, getting the right mind-set. It seems to be working, so I definitely hope Joe will do the same and, if he comes back stronger than he was before, then it is scary to think how good he is going to be."
