Escapes such as this merely fuel the sense that José Mourinho is invincible when it comes to Had the It was the type of flashpoint that provoked immediate confusion over whether the official had spotted a foul or a dive, and debate over whether Ramires was en route to the turf prior to impact or sent sprawling by Reid's intervention. The managers, predictably, agreed to disagree. By the time Eden Hazard's penalty had billowed the net, extending the Portuguese's unbeaten league run here to 66 matches, the injured West Brom goalkeeper Ben Foster had tweeted his own sense of deflation. "Load of shit," he offered. His team-mates made their feelings just as clear out on the pitch.
Chris Brunt and Jonas Olsson took their frustrations out on the officials, barking their disappointment at Marriner, an afternoon of admirable endeavour having been soured at the last. Steve Clarke's side can be inconsistent, blown away at Anfield one week but just as capable of winning at Manchester United, but they had been solidly impressive here. Well drilled and feverishly industrious, they had blunted the hosts in the opening period until their concentration wavered on the stroke of half-time. Once behind they were compelled to be slightly more expansive, only to excel yet more persuasively with their strength in the air and pace on the counterattack.
Shane Long had already thumped a header on to a post from Morgan Amalfitano's centre when the winger's delivery duly prompted panic at a corner just after the hour-mark. Gareth McAuley, such a threat at set-plays with his muscular presence and charge on to the cross, might have scored only for Petr Cech to push the attempt up rather than out. John Terry, Frank Lampard and Branislav Ivanovic were all inside the six-yard box watching the ball loop high into the early evening gloom, perhaps assuming its arc might take it over the bar and away, but it was Long who reacted smartest, springing up above all three to deposit his own header beyond Cech and in.
Mourinho bemoaned that defensive indecision, the concession too sloppy for comfort particularly given his side had succumbed on their last league outing at Newcastle and had considered this an opportunity to eat into Arsenal's lead at the top. Yet he was incensed seven minutes later when Stéphane Sessègnon's dispossession of Ivanovic just inside the Albion half was deemed legal. "Even the fourth official said I was right [to complain]," he offered having watched Sessègnon leave the Serb on the floor and break at pace, exchange passes with Liam Ridgewell, and then cut inside Terry to eke out space for a shot.
The attempt was scuffed and might have been stopped with ease, only to scuttle under Cech's loose attempt to save and Chelsea were breached yet again. Had Ivanovic been fouled in the build-up? "No," said Clarke. "They pressured us in midfield through the first half. When we do it very well on a Thereafter the home side cast caution aside and, had their opponents been more ruthless, might have been buried on the break. Those chances Chelsea created themselves were missed, Boaz Myhill springing to turn aside Ivanovic's shot and Willian heading over from point-blank range, before Ramires earned a reprieve and Hazard, his passport and place in the side restored, claimed a point.
"We deserved a draw," said Mourinho. "We were the only team who tried to score in that half."
The visitors had been unambitious but comfortable until virtually the half-time whistle, when Gary Cahill's cross-field pass was controlled on the chest by Hazard who cut in from the left flank and ran at Reid. The Belgian skimmed a low shot towards the far corner which Myhill pushed out and Ridgewell should then have cleared. But as he waited for the ball to come across his body, there was Samuel Eto'o, sneaking up on the blind side, to wrap his foot around the full-back and ram the loose ball into the gaping net. Myhill buried his head in the turf in disgust. By the end, that sense of exasperation had been exacerbated.
