Crystal Palace are to approach Tony Pulis to determine his interest in taking up the reins at the struggling Premier League club after Ian Holloway departed Selhurst Park admitting he had lost "the spirit of the group" since gaining promotion.
The London club have lost seven of their eight top-flight matches this term, with Holloway confirming his departure by "mutual agreement" less than five months after securing promotion via the play-offs. The 50-year-old cited exhaustion after a frantic summer spent instigating an overhaul of his squad which, he now concedes, has hindered more than it has helped Palace.
The co-chairman Steve Parish intends to consult two of the club's former managers, Steve Coppell and Holloway, who criticised the attitude of many of his summer signings, departs exactly a year since Dougie Freedman moved to Bolton Wanderers with Palace ensconced in the Championship promotion race. After coming close to losing his job in the spring as the team faltered alarmingly, the former Blackpool manager inspired his side to an unlikely elevation by beating Brighton and Watford in the play-offs to secure a first return to the Premier League in eight years. Play-offs aside, he had won only two of his last 18 league matches.
Yet, with Wilfried Zaha departed for Manchester United and the leading scorer Glenn Murray injured, Palace sought to strengthen in the summer despite lacking the scouting infrastructure to prosper. A total of 16 players joined in the summer, with Holloway admitting he had lost the "spirit" of the group. "I didn't value enough the spirit of the group that got us here," he said. "We changed to give us a chance to stay up but lost that spirit of the group. We've got worse in that vein rather than better and I owe it to the lads [who were promoted] to admit that."
Monday's emphatic defeat by Fulham at Selhurst Park proved pivotal, with Holloway offering his resignation in the aftermath only to be told to reconsider by Parish and the other co-chairman, Stephen Browett. Two days of reflection followed but, having openly questioned his ability to keep the side in the division, the manager's future had effectively been determined. "I am very tired, to be honest," he added. "I said to Steve: 'Am I the one with the energy left? Am I the one who can stand there and say we can beat Arsenal and get a draw elsewhere?'"
Pulis had been in the frame for positions at Sunderland, Derby County and Middlesbrough and is close to Holloway, who is the godfather to Pulis' son. The outgoing manager suggested he would endorse any move by Palace to offer his friend the job. "Tony's one of my best mates," he said. "I told him [Parish] it's who you need."
Parish will start the search for his fourth manager in three years on Thursday having blamed the club's "tiny infrastructure" for a "ridiculous" summer, claiming modern online scouting systems were "part the solution, and part the devil's machine". Keith Millen, the No2, will take charge of Saturday's game against the league leaders, Arsenal, at Selhurst Park.
