The limitations of the Football Association's newly adopted powers to take retrospective action have been exposed in the first high-profile test after Chelsea were braced to see Torres banned for a further three matches, ruling him out of all their domestic fixtures in October, after television footage captured the striker apparently clawing at the centre-half's cheek five minutes into the second half of Saturday's 1-1 draw with Tottenham.
The referee, Mike Dean, booked Torres for tripping Vertonghen in the buildup to their altercation but the fact he had not then witnessed Torres raising his hand to his marker potentially meant the FA could refer the incident to its new three-man panel of former referees.
However, having taken statements from the officials at White Hart Lane, the governing body determined that the assistant referee closest to the incident, Jake Collin, had seen "the coming together of the two players, albeit not in its entirety".
Torres's scratch had been to the left side of Vertonghen's face, with the assistant on the other side of the players and therefore unsighted, but because the linesman had effectively seen the forward raise his hand, the FA concluded it could not refer the matter to its panel. Torres was later sent off after a second yellow card, somewhat harshly after jumping with Vertonghen, but his suspension will extend no further than Sunday's Premier League game at Norwich City.
The FA's new process on retrospective sanctions is being piloted this season, with a three-man panel of former referees permitted to review incidents and decide if a charge ought to be brought if the match officials had not witnessed the possible offence. That replaced the old system, whereby action was taken only if the referee viewed footage post-match and conceded he would have sent a player off had he witnessed the misdemeanour at the time. In both cases, if any match official saw part of the incident – even if not the full detail – the FA would not take further action, unless it were deemed an "exceptional circumstance". Torres's scratch was not considered as exceptional, hence his reprieve.
An FA statement said: "In these particular circumstances, in line with the FA's policy on when retrospective action may be taken, reviewed this summer by the game's stakeholders [the Premier League, the Football League, the Professional Footballers' Association, the League Managers' Association, Professional Game Match Officials Limited and the National Game], no action may be taken."
