José Mourinho described it as "fair doping", that satisfied glow after a victory that apparently makes players more receptive to new ideas or strategies. The performance in a derby success over The Portuguese saw his team top the table on Saturday night but still has much to address. The peripheral role afforded Juan Mata has drawn the focus, the Spaniard is to start at Swindon on Tuesday in the Capital One Cup to demonstrate he can play as much of a part regaining lost possession as picking apart opponents with the ball. Mourinho will hope the player's performance demands greater future involvement, the onus on Mata to adapt, yet the 25-year-old is not alone in needing to convince. Even against League One opposition, Chelsea's forwards must make a mark.
While Romelu Lukaku, loaned to Everton, was buffeting and ultimately deflating West Ham at the other end of the District Line on Saturday, his parent club were still awaiting evidence that the strikers that remain at Mourinho's disposal can thrive. Fernando Torres's opener in the Uefa SuperCup against Bayern Munich represents their only goal to date this term, the slack having been taken up by those in midfield with the frontline so gummy.
Oscar and Mikel John Obi, the latter for the first time in 12,862 minutes at club level, were Chelsea's scorers here with Demba Ba not involved, Torres summoning one flicked header in his own cameo, and Samuel Eto'o prodding his only sight of goal high and wide on the stretch.
At some stage the trio will have to provide some bite if "Fernando is the opposite situation. Physically he is in a very good moment, he is very strong, sharp and fast. He had a fantastic header that would make a wonderful goal and the goalkeeper made a great save.
"So also a little bit of luck plays a role. I don't think he's short on confidence. I'm happy with Fernando. In the last game [against Basel] I left him out of selection and his reaction was positive: to come on for the last 30 minutes and play hard and seriously. I'm happy with him and he has my trust. He is a good player, a good professional and it was a nice surprise for me the way he works, so I believe in Fernando."
Torres may join his compatriots Mata and César Azpilicueta in starting at the County Ground and would do well to find his touch in front of goal before Eto'o, at 32, adjusts to a more upbeat rhythm. The same might be said, of course, of Fulham's Darren Bent whose first-half chance, as he skipped on to Pajtim Kasami's pass only to strike the advancing Petr Cech with his shot, felt pivotal.
Chelsea were nervous at the time but, in monopolising possession, gradually eroded Fulham's resolve. Indeed, Martin Jol must have been privately dismayed at his own players' lack of ambition, with urgency utterly lacking in their approach even once they trailed.
They host Everton in their own League Cup tie on Tuesday and will juggle their resources once more, but Bent needs games and Dimitar Berbatov's return from a hamstring strain might be timely. Jol, with a new owner in Shahid Khan watching on from afar, could do with arresting his side's spluttering start to the campaign sooner rather than later.
For Mourinho, the mood much improved, the process of change is on-going.
