YouTube video, cropped up. The clip, from 1996, sees the callow teenager squirming awkwardly on the top table as a member of the audience rips into his credentials to represent the first team while apparently better players, such as Matt Holland and Scott Canham, had been allowed to leave.
The riposte from Harry Redknapp, sitting four places to his nephew's left, is just as dismissive. "I'm telling you now, he will go right to the very top," said the manager. "He's got everything needed to become a top-class midfield player."
Redknapp's words have long since proved prophetic and, with Lampard set to become the eighth man to achieve 100 Lampard recalls the incident clearly. "Harry went out on a bit of a limb that night and made some big judgments," he says. "I've watched it back and not only my embarrassing curtains and chubby face, but the whole moment, made me smile. It probably made someone duck their head in east London somewhere, too. That was a tough time for me. I had the nepotism thing thrown at me regularly and, as a kid, I found it quite hard to deal with.
"I'd gone into a zone when the geezer started digging me out so I didn't hear what Harry said at the time but it's nice someone sticks up for you. I suppose it makes you want to prove them right and I'm pleased I did because it looks great looking back now, doesn't it?"
Much of Lampard's career has been glittering, with his successes made to seem all the more worthy by being borne of an unremitting work ethic. Others may have more natural talent but few can eclipse his eagerness to improve and adapt his game.
Lampard puts that down to the influence of his father, Frank Sr, who was capped twice but remains as exacting now about every minor blemish in his son's performances for club or country. "He put that work ethic in me and always made me very aware of my weaknesses," says the midfielder. "Not in a bad way. He'd praise the good things but he was on about my pace, about trying to get in the box and score goals and have the energy to be able to do that.
"He let me know it was the extra runs, extra hours practising shooting and finishing that count. He bullied me into it but I can't thank him enough for it now. It was something I needed to do. I remember six or so years ago, when I was getting a bit of stick, ringing him up and saying I was going to pack up, and he gave me a little jolt over the phone. He made sure I got my head down and got through it.
"I wasn't playing my best but you have ups and downs in an England career. That was one of the harder moments and he gave me the kick up the bum I needed. He's still on at me now. He'll have a go at me for not tracking a runner or doing the basic, dirty work, and will ask me if I've been doing my sprints in the week. I'm 35, for God's sake."
Lampard Sr was exploring flights to Kiev late last week. The nagging should give way to pride night.
It has been his son's longevity at this level that stands out. Of the 16 players who featured for Kevin Keegan's side against Belgium at the Stadium of Light on 10 October 1999, the evening a 21-year-old Lampard made his debut, only Emile Heskey is still playing professional football, albeit Down Under. It would be 17 months before the youngster featured for England again, and 2004 before he established himself at this level. He still recalls Gareth Southgate calming him pre-match at Sunderland, a role he now plays himself with such as Ross Barkley in the current squad. He recognises that he has much to offer the younger players – he has already taken on some duties at Chelsea's academy before working on his coaching qualifications – and even the Football Association's chairman, Greg Dyke.
Dyke's speech last week, outlining the problems affecting the national team, struck a chord with the veteran. He expects to be consulted when the chairman's commission addresses the issues in the months ahead. "Only actions actually matter and you can talk about what we're going to do over the next 10 years but we have to go and do it. I think he'll speak to people like me and Steven Gerrard. I don't think you can get much better than speaking to someone like Steven, with all his experience, to see what he thinks.
"We can improve the coaching still and the young kids, certainly, but we shouldn't put ourselves down too much either. No team has got a divine right to win World Cups every four years. It's just what action you take, really."
As for Dyke's target of winning the World Cup in 2022, Lampard says: "If he's saying: 'That's our ambition, to be in a position to be able to win it', then I agree. We have to think like that and coach the kids coming through better.
"For me, it's about technical awareness as much as technical ability on the ball. Look at some of the players coming to the Premier League now: Mesut Ozil, when he's on the ball, can let it run or take his first touch in the right place. When I watch the young Chelsea kids train now, they teach those things. When I was at West Ham, some of the coaches used to tell you to 'Get it behind', this sort of stuff. You do see the change. Unfortunately we're going to have to wait a little bit for it to hopefully come through."
Lampard laughs at the suggestion that he might one day benefit as a manager, perhaps even of the national team, from the emergence of a new breed of player. "We've not won anything for 50 years and they always say take the job when it can only get better. One day, somebody is going to do that. As for me, I'd like people to remember me as a player who gave everything and was proud to play for his country. There have obviously been ups and downs. Steven Gerrard said when he got to 100 that in terms of winning something, we've failed. But I don't think you should write off every England player of the last 50 years as a failure because we've not won anything."
Perhaps even that dissonant voice from the Rollerbowl might agree with that much.
