While Sturridge returned to Liverpool on Thursday to receive further treatment on a thigh complaint, Lambert was digesting confirmation that he will make his first competitive start against the side ranked 123 in the world.
The 31-year-old made his debut from the bench in last month's friendly against Scotland and nodded the winner after only 166 seconds on the pitch. While that was an eye-catching introduction at this level, his selection for a vital qualifier represents a notable show of faith from the management, even if England's options have been left severely depleted by the absence of Sturridge and Wayne Rooney.
"It would be wrong if I didn't admit the loss of Rooney and Sturridge is a major blow for us," Hodgson said. "Even before the weekend, those two were very much in my mind as two important strikers for these two games. But Rickie deserves a chance and this is an opportunity, a chance to get the shirt and shine. I'm expecting Lambert, like Kyle Walker [in the absence of Glen Johnson], to make it clear he should be there, he deserves to be there and he has the quality to be there."
Lambert was the joint leading English scorer in last season's Premier League, his first campaign at that level having yielded 15 goals after a 12-year professional career spent largely in the lower leagues. Indeed, he has played only two full seasons in the top two divisions of the domestic game. The selection against Moldova ended up as a straight choice between the Southampton forward and Tottenham Hotspur's Jermain Defoe, with Hodgson opting for the more inexperienced player given the Spurs striker has played only 37 minutes of Premier League football to date this season, and all as a substitute.
"Jermain hasn't played for Spurs and came to the training camp with a slight injury, then didn't train for the first couple of days," Hodgson said. "Luckily he has recovered but it's partly the fact Lambert turned up fully fit having played the three [Premier League] matches. Defoe hasn't played and turned up with a slight injury. That swayed me early on to turn my attention to Rickie. But I believe in Jermain Defoe. He's been with me in all the squads and was very sharp in training today. I've not dismissed him, but Lambert's the one I'll start."
Sturridge returned to Merseyside for treatment on the thigh injury that had caused him discomfort in the buildup to last Sunday's victory over Manchester United, in which he had scored his fifth goal in four appearances this season. He will return to the England squad on Sunday to be assessed by the medical staff before any decision is made as to whether he will travel to the Ukraine that evening ahead of the daunting fixture in Kiev on Tuesday, with Hodgson cautious over his chances of proving his fitness.
"We have to be honest here: Sturridge is doing ever so well to try and make himself available," added the "But he wants to be a part of it. He's young and he can recover quickly. We hope there's some good news on Sunday morning and he can come with us and take part. I'm not enormously optimistic. I'm not confident. But if he could, he so desperately wants to be a part of it that he will be there. But we can't put him out there unless he is fit."
