The national team will attempt to inject much needed momentum into their qualifying campaign by beating Moldova at Wembley on Friday, before next week's more testing trip to Ukraine, in the wake of Dyke challenging the England set-up to win the World Cup in 2022. The FA chairman followed up those comments, made in a speech earlier this week, by telling the BBC's Today programme: "I don't think anyone realistically thinks we are going to win the World Cup in Brazil. It doesn't mean we can't do well in Brazil as long as we qualify."
While Hodgson was realistic in terms of his side's prospects in South America should they qualify, he remains bullish over expectations at the finals.
Asked whether his team were effectively on a doomed mission, the manager said: "We don't see it that way. None of us, with the team, ever saw it in that way. And we don't believe our chairman sees anything as a doomed mission. He also said in his speech how much he supports the team and hopes we get to Brazil and do well.
"I prefer to go along that route. I don't think he's giving up on the team. That would be harsh on him and even harsher on the team. They don't deserve that. I don't think many people will be racing out to place bets on England to win the That sentiment was echoed by the "But we don't want to get ahead of ourselves. Our priority is to get there first. That's the challenge. We want to qualify for the World Cup, go there and make the nation proud. We can do that without winning [it]. Playing at a World Cup was always the pinnacle of any footballer's dream as a kid. Especially a World Cup in Brazil. That's enough motivation for me."
Hodgson has selected arguably his strongest available side for the game against Moldova, with Rickie Lambert starting for the first time in the absence of the injured Wayne Rooney and Daniel Sturridge. He will play both Gerrard and Frank Lampard alongside Jack Wilshere in midfield, and Ashley Cole at left-back, the experienced older heads selected with Dyke having fuelled the debate over the dearth of options available to the national manager with so few Englishmen featuring regularly on a weekly basis in the Premier League.
"We can't deny that, in certain positions, we have enormous competition and others where the competition is less [fierce]," added Hodgson. "The bottom line is that maybe it is the right time to have this type of discussion, to take stock of all the things. What's going to happen in the years ahead and how are we going to make certain that whatever young talent we do produce is to be nurtured and turned into the next Gerrards and Lampards, Beckhams and Scholeses? Hopefully all the parties will come together.
"Let's get everyone together, get some opinions and let's see if there's something that can be done to make things better. That's the bottom line. But at the moment other things are preoccupying me: can we get the points against Moldova and Ukraine to make the matches in October viable propositions to get to Brazil?"
