The Bournemouth manager, Eddie Howe, admitted the club’s elevation to the Premier League “does not seem real” after his team all but guaranteed a first ever campaign in the elite by beating Bolton Wanderers on the south coast. Only defeat at Charlton, combined with third-placed Middlesbrough conjuring a 20-goal swing, on Saturday will deny the Cherries becoming the 47th club to grace the The joyous home supporters, invading the pitch on the final whistle here, were confident promotion has been achieved. It is only seven years since “It’s been an amazing journey,” said Howe, who had returned to the club for a second stint as manager when they were 21st in League One in 2012.
“This club was on its knees six or seven years ago. We had nothing, the bailiffs coming in every day, people not getting paid and being made redundant. But a group of supporters put their hands in their pockets to keep the club alive and they are reaping the rewards.
“ It was always the fans who kept it going. I remember when I was a youth-team player, fans putting money in buckets at the Winter Gardens. To be in this position... it doesn’t seem real. The loyal supporters who stayed with us need to savour this moment. All the hard work has been worth it.
“This is never a journey we expected to go on but, through hard work and some investment, we managed to do it. The players have been magnificent and it is an achievement they deserved.
“We have players with a special attitude who have given their hearts and souls to this club. And I’ve got to mention the owner Maxim Demin. You get nowhere at this level without investment but he has not only put his money into the club but also had the foresight and the innovation to try to improve things on and off the pitch.”
There were ecstatic scenes in the dressing-room after the match, with the chairman, Jeff Mostyn, who had injected his own money into the club to keep them afloat, heaping praise on the squad and Howe. “We’ve achieved the impossible,” said Mostyn. “It’s an absolute dream come true. From League Two to the Premier League, these guys are just incredible. Eddie has created a siege mentality and the boys have carried us up four divisions against all the odds.
“The manager’s so calm and collected and just wants to develop the team in his own style. We will actually make the Premier League proud. The boys have been magnificent.”
Howe, who was recently voted the Football League’s manager of the decade, added: “This is the club I watched as a kid, the club that gave me an opportunity in the game as a player and a manager.
“I have always felt the supporters are with me and the players have been magnificent. It shouldn’t be them thanking me, it should be me thanking them. It is a family club and deserves its moment in the sun.”
