The foreign secretary, Hammond was giving evidence to parliament’s intelligence and security committee, which is reviewing the need for new oversight legislation to regulate the UK’s electronic espionage agency, GCHQ, in the light of the revelations on bulk data collection made by the former US intelligence contractor Edward Snowden.
Hammond told the committee that GCHQ’s bulk collection of private data from emails, internet activity and telephone usage did not amount to mass surveillance because the state did not have the resources to trawl through the huge volume of information involved, and because of legal safeguards on how the data was used.
“There’s also a very important safeguard provided by the culture within the agencies, which is the exact opposite of what some movies might like to suggest,” he said.
“The agencies are extremely cautious, extremely focused on their responsibility to maintain the culture of proportionality and necessity in everything they do. And there is an atmosphere … which is very far from a gung-ho approach. It is very cautious, very measured.”
Hammond – who oversees the work of Privacy and civil rights groups have argued that, in light of the Snowden revelations, all electronic surveillance warrants should go before a judge to ensure the phenomenal power available to government as a result of modern surveillance technology should be subject to some form of judicial constraint. Hammond countered that judges would assess surveillance warrant requests primarily from a legal standpoint. Only an elected official could properly apply political judgment on the necessity and proportionality of an eavesdropping operation.
The foreign secretary said that in issuing surveillance warrants he was subject not just to legal but also to political constraints, which were narrower.
“Perhaps it is a feature of the times that we live in, but I’m sure I can speak for all my colleagues who sign warrants that we all have, in the back of our minds, that at some point in the future we will – not might be, but will – be appearing before some inquiry or tribunal or court to account for the decisions we’ve made,” Hammond said.
Mike Harris, the campaign director of Don’t Spy on Us, a coalition of privacy and digital rights advocacy groups, argued that ministers should indeed make political judgments on warrants, but their decisions should then be reviewed by judges.
“The safeguards he talks about are not safeguards at all. It is very hard to tell in practice who is a UK-based party to a communication,” Harris said. “This comes in the context of an absence of judicial oversight and a lack of scrutiny from parliament and an under-resourcing of the intelligence commissioners, so in effect the public can’t be certain that the reassurances from the minister are upheld in any way by intelligence agencies.”
