The first of a group of more than 120 Russian Cossacks have left Bosnia after a mysterious fortnight-long visit that was officially for a cultural festival but which triggered reports of a Crimea-style “special forces” intervention in support of Serb separatism.
Amid the confusion one thing eventually became clear: the Cossacks could not dance. About 30 of the visitors took part in what was billed as “the Russian-Serbian March of Love” on 5 October in a central square in Banja Luka, the main town in the semi-autonomous Serb half of Bosnia, and a dance a week later to mark the end of what was supposed to have been a week marking the first world war centenary.
Reports in the Sarajevo press about the Cossacks’ arrival described them as “special forces” and revealed that the group’s leader, Nikolai Djakonov, had led an armed unit that took part in the invasion and annexation of Crimea in the spring.
The march of love in Banja Luka, which was hastily arranged with no prior publicity, may have been intended to prove the Cossacks’ benign intent. If so, the Cossacks did little to support the Serb authorities’ claim that they were a cultural troupe. They turned out in old-fashioned satin tunics and shaggy sheepskin hats, and showed few signs of ever having danced before. When they did attempt to take a few steps it was mostly to follow the lead of a group of local Serb women in traditional dress who took part in the event.
“There were very handsome in their costumes, but they couldn’t dance,” said Natasa, a Banja Luka woman who watched the performance. Another unimpressed local said: “It was like a comedy film, where the heroes have to dress up and pretend to be something that they’re not.”
If the Djakonov Cossacks did not fly 1,000 miles from “There is no clear picture what they were doing,” said Sanja Skuletic-Malagic, a spokeswoman for the foreigners service department at the security ministry in Sarajevo. “We watched what they were doing because of the intelligence reports of their part in separatism in Ukraine, and also because it was clear they weren’t a cultural group. So we were watching, but they didn’t do anything illegal. And Djakonov is not on any blacklist.”
Skuletic-Malagic said 50 of the group of 127 Cossacks left on Tuesday, heading for Belgrade and a flight back to Russia. The rest were due to leave on Wednesday and Thursday.
In Banja Luka, most veteran observers of the political scene believed the Russians’ arrival was connected to the Bosnian elections last Sunday, in which the Serb separatist leader Milorad Dodik was fighting to hold on to the presidency of the Serb half of the country in the face of an unprecedentedly strong opposition challenge.
“The Cossacks might have been here to provide muscle if Dodik lost and there was a dispute about the election,” said one political analyst, who asked not to be identified. Dodik, who has pledged to lead the Bosnian Serbs to independence, warned before Sunday’s vote that unspecified “foreign intelligence agents” were seeking to foment riots to disrupt the Serb republic.
The analyst added: “Alternatively, they were just there for show, as a symbol of Dodik’s close ties with Putin, to show he has a big friend.” Dodik held talks with Putin in Moscow less than a month ago, in which the Russian leader publicly praised him and backed him in the poll.
