A David Cameron's justification for air strikes, overwhelmingly accepted by parliament, is that the spread of 
A Isis has up to now taken Britons hostage where it has found them on territory it controls or contests. Participation in the air war would escalate the conflict between the UK and Isis and therefore increase the direct threat of attacks on British soil. Furthermore, the dropping of bombs will almost certainly cause civilian casualties and would therefore be morally wrong and draw the enmity of other Muslim groups. Intervention plays into Isis's hands, allowing it to present a campaign of murder against local communities as a struggle between Islam and the west, or portray itself as the defender of Arab nations against western imperialism.

A Unlike the 2003 Iraq invasion, Britain is sending in its forces at the request of the sovereign government in Baghdad, which is under mortal threat. The only way that could be questioned under international law is if there was any evidence that the new Iraqi government had been pressured into issuing the invitation. There is no clear evidence that is the case. For the same reasons, carrying out attacks against Isis positions in Syria, as the US is doing, would be legally controversial. The Assad regime in Damascus is unlikely to request western military involvement in its territory. The Obama administration is justifying its Syrian air strikes as acts of collective self-defence. Its ally, Iraq, is under attack from Isis strongholds in 
A The defence secretary, Michael Fallon, has argued there is a strong military case for carrying the campaign against Isis into Syria as its strongholds are there and it will not be defeated unless it is attacked on both sides of the border. But the government has promised to go back to parliament for separate approval before bombing Isis in Syria.

A It threatens to be a lengthy campaign. It is extremely difficult to defeat a guerrilla movement from the air alone and the west's allies on the ground are very weak. The Iraqi army has shown itself to be hollow, divided and unmotivated despite billions of dollars of western investment. The Kurdish peshmerga forces are highly motivated and cohesive, but few in number. On the Syrian side of the border, the western-backed Free Syrian Army is also small and divided. The US is planning to train 5,000 of its fighters in the hope that the force will provide a moderate counterweight to Isis. The Syrian government army is the strongest force in the region, but the west will be reluctant to co-ordinate with it or be seen to support its advance. The best hope of an end to the war is if the Sunni tribes in 
A Both the United States and the UK have consistently ruled this out, and it seems highly unlikely at present that either would risk a return to a high-casualty military quagmire from which they have only just extricated themselves. It is possible that the UK will take part in training missions and occasional special forces operations, however.

A Fellow members of the coalition include the US, France, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. There is widespread international support for the action in Iraq. The United Nation secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, has welcomed it. Even Russia and Iran have not issued strenuous objections. Iran's president, Hassan Rouhani, even offered a muted welcome for western action in Iraq. Going into Syria would be another matter. Both the Russians and Iranians have warned they would view that as illegal, and they would be backed by China and many other nations. At present, winning a security council mandate for operations in Syria looks almost impossible.

A Not officially. Cameron insists that our enemy's enemy is still our enemy. The US informed Damascus when it was about to launch air strikes in Syria but did not seek consent. However, the strikes strengthen Assad's hands both militarily and politically. He and his Russian and Iranian backers have claimed the western campaign against Isis proves their warnings that the west was on the wrong side in the Syrian civil war. Western governments dispute that and say it was the brutality of the Assad regime that created conditions for Isis's meteoric rise. The longer the campaign goes on, and the more it strays into Syria, the more this will become a quandary for the west. What is clear is that the effort to topple Assad is no longer a priority.
