Speaking to the “We will use our military might in a campaign of air strikes to roll back Isil. We will train and equip forces fighting against these terrorists on the ground. We will work to cut off their financing, and to stop the flow of fighters into and out of the region,” he said.
“Today, I ask the world to join in this effort. Those who have joined Isil should leave the battlefield while they can.”
In the tone of his remarks, Obama made it clear that he was aware that his address risked sounding like an echo of UN speeches made over 10 years ago by President Bush – an era marked by widespread distrust of the US and its motives. Obama tried to distance his campaign against extremism as much as possible from his predecessor’s strategy.
“I have made it clear that America will not base our entire foreign policy on reacting to terrorism. Rather, we have waged a focused campaign against al-Qaida and its associated forces – taking out their leaders, and denying them the safe havens they rely upon,” Obama said.
Obama addressed head-on the deep divide between the west and Russia that has threatened to paralyse the work of the UN security council. He delivered the most direct indictment of Moscow heard from an American president in the general assembly since before the end of the cold war, saying its actions in Ukraine represented a threat to the international order established after the second world war and symbolised by the UN.
“This is a vision of the world in which might makes right – a world in which one nation’s borders can be redrawn by another, and civilized people are not allowed to recover the remains of their loved ones because of the truth that might be revealed,” Obama said.
“America stands for something different. We believe that right makes might – that bigger nations should not be able to bully smaller ones; that people should be able to choose their own future.”
Obama stressed that the US was willing to cooperate with Moscow on the pressing global challenges of the day, like climate change and the spread of the Ebola virus, but only “if Russia changes course”.
The president’s denunciation of Moscow had echoes of the cold war, portraying Russia as the antithesis of everything America stood for, and presenting the two countries as polar opposites the world would have choose between.
Most of the speech, however ,was devoted the new challenges to world order presented by the While acknowledging that terrorism was nothing new, the president suggested that the movement’s extreme brutality coupled with its mastery of tools of globalisation like social media made the group a particularly potent threat.
“With access to technology that allows small groups to do great harm, they have embraced a nightmarish vision that would divide the world into adherents and infidels – killing as many innocent civilians as possible; and employing the most brutal methods to intimidate people within their communities,” he said.
He emphasised that Washington was now seeking as wide a coalition as possible to combat the influence of Isis, starting in the Islamic world. “It is the task of all great religions to accommodate devout faith with a modern, multicultural world,” he says, calling for the battle of ideas to be taken online.“That means contesting the space that terrorists occupy – including the internet and social media. Their propaganda has coerced young people to travel abroad to fight their wars, and turned students into suicide bombers. We must offer an alternative vision,” he said, and he praised the “notinmyname” campaign launched by young British Muslims.
