chairs a special meeting of the UN security council on Wednesday it will be only the second time any US president has taken such a dramatic and symbolic step.
By bringing other world leaders to the famous circular arena, Obama seeks to dramatise the urgency of the issue at hand, the threat of the spread in the Middle East of a new extremist group, The message is clear: he is nothing like his predecessor, Yet, however hard Obama seeks to be the antithesis of Bush, the ghost of the Iraq war will hang over Wednesday’s proceedings. The president will arrive having just authorised the extension of the US-led air campaign against Isis in Syria, the legality of which is hotly contested.
The resolution that the security council will debate on Wednesday concerns cutting off international sources of financing and support for Isis and other terrorist groups – an aim that does in principle have concerted support inside the 15-nation body. But other states, led by The resolution itself has some grey areas. It requires member states to stop terrorist groups such as Isis “recruiting, organising, transporting or equipping” on their territory or through their citizens. It will be framed under chapter seven of the UN charter, meaning it will be legally binding on member states, and a UN panel is supposed to assess compliance, but there are no enforcement measures envisaged. It will rely largely on states observing the spirit of the resolution. That will be challenging for US allies with a long and porous border with Syria, such as Turkey, and for Arab states such as The hope is that a binding UN resolution will make it easier for states to pass their own counter-terrorism legislation. It is less costly politically to be seen to comply with international law than to bow to US pressure. Yet for all of Obama’s multilateralist instincts, US leadership and foreign policy will be once more on trial at the security council at the start of a new Middle East war.
Memorable moments from the UN general assembly


