Authorities in the Netherlands are due to publish a preliminary report on the July downing of The Dutch Safety Board (DSB) says the report, due on Tuesday, will include details gathered from the cockpit voice recorder, the flight data recorder, satellite and other images, and radar information.
It is not clear whether the evidence will prove who fired the missile thought to have brought down the plane, killing all 298 people on board.
On the day of the disaster, a pro-Russia separatist leader said on social media that his forces had shot down a Ukrainian warplane but then removed the claim after it became clear a civilian airliner had been brought down. The Ukrainian government has also published intercepts, apparently between separatists, suggesting their side fired the missile. It is unclear whether the DSB report will comment on the authenticity of those intercepts.
The US and On its website the Dutch board said: "The DSB will not make any statements with regard to apportioning blame or liability, and these issues will not form part of its investigation."
The report will come out at a time when the European Union is weighing new sanctions against However, their entry into force was delayed for a "few days" according to a statement from Brussels, to leave time to assess the implementation of a tenuous ceasefire agreement in Ukraine negotiated last Friday.
Because of earlier fighting around the MH17 crash site, DSB investigators have been unable to visit the scene, but the organisation said it had carried out an investigation based on other sources of information. It added: "Once a secure and stable situation has been established, the DSB will visit the location. This is in order to verify the results of the investigation from other sources and to conduct a specific search for wreckage and other vital pieces."
Final conclusions are expected to take up to a year to produce but rules set out by the International Civil Aviation Organisation require a progress report to be issued.
"The preliminary report is not subject to any criteria in terms of structure or scope. The content is partly dependent on the progress of the investigation and the need to report certain findings," the DSB website said, adding that the interim report would allow "an initial, provisional sequence of events to be made".
Investigative journalism website Bellingcat has published photographs it said suggested the anti-aircraft missile involved in the attack was fired by a Russian unit, the 53rd Buk brigade, based in the city of Kursk. "The new information presented in this article adds to the existing evidence that the Russian government bears responsibility for the tragedy," it said.
