"Who do you trust? How do you know?" Nessa Stein has asked these questions for the past seven weeks in The Honourable Woman, a tale of intrigue, betrayal and silk blouses set against the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We will hopefully know the answers to them when the BBC2 series reaches its finale on Thursday.
Whether we will have learned anything about Gaza or the Israeli-Palestinian struggle is another matter. This is a slick drama with fabulous actors, a tense plot and a classy, literate script. The conflict is the flavouring, the nest of vipers where nothing is as it seems and no one can be trusted, while the writer and director, Hugo Blick, seeks to insure himself against the political incorrectness of the whole oriental stereotype by making the CIA and its British lackeys the meanest and most deceptive baddies of all.
So the ruthless and omnipotent assassin, a regular plot device of political thrillers, is in this case a Palestinian militant. Just like the show's American inspiration, Homeland (which is in turn based on an Israeli original), it revives the spectre of the Arab bogeyman as the evil genius among us, ghosting across borders on false passports. The only apparently sympathetic Palestinian in the drama, Atika, turned out last week to be in league with the hitman, setting up her Jewish lover for the kill.
This is understandably vexing for Palestinians. After all, it is Mossad that has won itself the reputation in recent years for sending assassins to kill abroad on forged identity papers. Hamas and Islamic Jihad have largely fought their battles on home turf with much blunter methods. No doubt they would love to have a weapon as lethal as the molten-faced killer in The Honourable Woman. But the penultimate episode revealed he had been in cahoots with a British spy who was herself moonlighting for the Americans. So that's all right, then.
And to even things up further, there is a Jewish terrorist group too, also knocking people off and also taking orders from the same devious and ambitious Brit.
The other Israelis and British Jews have an easier time of it, apart from some strangled accents. Where The Honourable Woman feels most authentic is when it is closest to home. MI6 is fairly accurately portrayed as spending a lot of time and effort trying to work out what its US cousins are up to, and then striving to snuggle up to them (although the institution's apparent domination by strong-willed, competing women may seem less familiar to insiders).
Likewise, the agony of liberal British Jews looking on in horror at the bloodletting in Israel and the 