The Cameron government's decision to arm Kurdish fighters brings the UK in step with the US and France in an effort to bolster Kurdistan as a bastion against the spread of a particularly murderous form of Islamic extremism and maintain a safe haven for Iraqis and Syrians forced to flee their homes by the tidal wave of violence sweeping the region.
However, as with all policies involving a flow of arms into a war zone, it comes with a burden of risk. Like the arsenal of weapons provided over the years to the Iraqi national army, it could fall into the hands of the More importantly, directly arming the This strategic concern has been outweighed here by the short-term imperatives of stopping the advance of Isis and maintaining Kurdistan as a safe haven for hundreds of thousands of displaced Iraqis and displaced Syrians. Also, the UK, US and France are likely to restrict their supplies to light arms, which would not fundamentally alter the balance of power between Baghdad and Irbil, the Kurdish capital.
Richard Gowan, research director of the Centre on International Cooperation, at New York University, said: "There are moments in fast-moving crises when you simply have to stop events spiralling out of control, and worry about the consequences later. This is one of those moments. Arming the Kurds may be a step towards the final fragmentation of Shashank Joshi, a research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, said: "It is very clear that Kurdish fighters have played a substantial role in the humanitarian relief effort, helping save the Yazidis and holding off Isis. It doesn't have the baggage of the decision over whether to arm the Syrian opposition, nor all the problems of the Iraqi forces, whose weapons fell into Isis's hands.
"It's important to bear in mind, however, that the Kurds are not going to be fighting very far from the KRG [Kurdistan Regional Government] so this is not going to address the bigger problem of what is happening elsewhere in Iraq, in Anbar, in Ramadi and elsewhere."
The decision ends the UK's temporary halfway policy of delivering other countries' arms to the Kurdish As the former Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown argued: "It's a strange scruple that flies in other peoples' weapons but denies access to our own. Is there a difference?"
Unlike decisions on arming the Libyan or Syrian rebels, there are no particular legal problems with supplying the Kurds. The Kurds run the recognised regional government, and the arms shipments are certain to be approved by Iraq's Kurdish president, Fouad Massoum.
Gowan said: "The US and the UK find themselves in a distinctly better position at the end of the week than seemed possible at the start: the humanitarian situation on the Sinjar mountain has eased, in part thanks to the US strikes, and it seems that a new government may be coming together in Baghdad. International support for the limited intervention, even from regular doves like Germany, is holding up pretty well so far. But this is not a 'clean win': the strategic question of how to defeat Isis remains unresolved."
