It would have taken a bold scriptwriter to have imagined the arc of William Hague's four-year career as foreign secretary. He arrived in office with the image of a stolid traditionalist, suffered some early wounding setbacks but emerged at the end of it as a pioneering campaigner in partnership with one of the most glamorous film stars on the planet.
Hague and Angelina Jolie's joint global campaign to bring an end to the use of mass rape as a weapon of war has been one of the most surprising double acts in political history. Jolie brought with her dazzling fame but also the reputation for risk-taking and danger in her private life. Hague is cautious, decidedly untrendy and deliberate, occasionally plodding in style.
Just how much impact they will have on the epidemic of sexual violence on the world's battlefields will not be clear for years, but with a well-attended summit last month, they appear to have put the issue on the global agenda. Officials insist the campaign will continue after Hague leaves the Foreign Office.
Any such legacy would have seemed unlikely in September 2010, just four months after Hague became foreign secretary, when he was fending off rumours of having had an affair with a young special adviser with a deeply personal statement about his struggle to start a family.
Five months later, the Foreign Office was in the news again for all the wrong reasons. Planes sent to evacuate Britons after civil war broke out in Libya broke down, leaving some 500 stranded while other nations appeared to be successfully extricating their citizens. The malfunction of the plane was not the Foreign Office's fault but questions began to be asked about Hague's future in office.
He responded in various ways. He became considerably less accessible to the press than any of his predecessors, certainly much less available than his Labour immediate predecessor, David Miliband. But whereas Miliband was seeking to rise further in his party, Hague had no ambitions for the top job. He had already had an unhappy stint as leader of the opposition. A side-effect of this reaction, however, was to make the Foreign Office as a whole a less transparent institution, its officials less confident about explaining foreign policy.
At the same time, Hague went about building up the institution, which was in retreat and in deep financial trouble when he arrived. He was able to change the budget practice whereby the Foreign Office bore all the risk of exchange rate fluctuations and was able to ward off the worst of the budget cuts. By the end of his time in office he will have overseen the opening of 20 new embassies, high commissions and consulates, as well as a language school and a diplomatic academy.
In 2012, he unveiled a new crisis centre in the basement of the Foreign Office for the co-ordination of overseas rescues, aimed at avoiding a repeat of the previous year's Libyan fiasco.
Hague's most radical departure and possibly his most enduring legacy, however, was to use the Foreign Office as a launch pad for a global campaign. He had set out as a foreign secretary in search of a cause, inspired by one of his political heroes, the anti-slavery campaigner, William Wilberforce, whose biography he wrote, and he found it when one of his advisers showed him the 2011 film Jolie had made about the rape camps in the Bosnian war, Land of Blood and Honey.
Their joint Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative involved drawing up a new international protocol, laying out standards for the investigation and prosecution of rape in conflict, currently rampant in Syria and the Democratic Republic of Congo. At the June summit in London's Docklands, 117 countries formally signed the protocol. Britain also pushed for military training around the world, especially for prospective UN peacekeeping troops, to include elements aimed at spotting and preventing the incidence of mass rape by armed groups.
In committing the machinery of British diplomacy to the promotion of that cause, Hague may have created a more feasible model for UK foreign policy than the institutional obsession with "punching above our weight" by sticking as close to possible to Washington and vying to be the second biggest troop contributor in foreign adventures.

Although that remains a bulwark of foreign policy doctrine, Hague, a fierce Atlanticist himself, may have set an alternative, shrugging off the last delusions of imperial greatness, finding a humanitarian cause to lead, in which even a middling power like Britain can make a difference.
