The US secretary of state, US officials are refusing to discuss the option of an extension of a few months, for fear of lessening the pressure on negotiators to make concessions in the last week of talks, but there is still a considerable distance between the negotiating positions of the Iranians and a six-nation group representing the international community.
All parties would be very reluctant to break off negotiations because of its impact on stability around the Gulf. The deadline was self-imposed by the negotiating parties who gave themselves the option of talking for a further six months under an interim deal they signed in November, but none of the parties want to wait that long lest they lose political momentum for a deal at home. If there is an extension, few believe it will be longer than three months.
"Obviously we have some very significant gaps still, so we need to see if we can make some progress," Kerry told reporters as he entered talks in a central Vienna hotel.
He was joined by the German foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, to discuss the recent US-German spy row, and by William Hague and Laurent Fabius, their counterparts from the UK and France.
"If we can reach a deal by 20 July, bravo, if it's serious," Fabius told reporters. "If we can't, there are two possibilities. One, we either extend … or we will have to say that unfortunately there is no prospect for a deal."
Hague said: "There are very significant gaps, that is very clear in these negotiations, and it is unlikely there will be a quick breakthrough today. But we have gathered foreign ministers at the request of Baroness Ashton [the EU foreign policy chief] to see what the scope is for making progress before 20 July next week when the six-month period of the interim agreement expires."
Hague said there would also be discussions over the course of the day on the urgent need for a ceasefire in Gaza.
The Russian and Chinese foreign ministers were attending a Bric summit in Brazil. The two countries, part of the six-nation negotiating group, sent senior diplomats instead.
The Iranian delegation was led by the foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, who met the European foreign ministers and Ashton on Sunday afternoon and was due to hold a separate meeting with Kerry.
He tweeted before Kerry's arrival: "We're able to make history by this time next Sunday. Trust is a two-way street. Concerns of all sides must be addressed to reach a deal."
In a second tweet, Zarif said: "I won't engage in blame games or spin. Not my style. What I will engage in is a sincere effort to come to an agreement. I expect the same"
However, pessimism surrounding the talks was deepened last week by a speech by Iran's supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, publicly stating a negotiating position that the west sees as unrealistic, involving a more than tenfold increase in the capacity of Iran's uranium enrichment industry.
A senior US official involved in the negotiations said: "On some key issues, "I think that everyone at the table has come with ideas," the American official said. " We have presented a number of proposals, concepts, ways forward, that we think are very thoughtful and acknowledge the tremendous scientific knowhow that Iran has, but at the same time really does mean that Iran must address the international community's concerns."
He added: "If, at the end of that process, we have not come to a final agreement, then we will assess where we are and the secretary [Kerry] will make recommendations to the president about next steps."
