The officials said that there is strong evidence that Syria is using chlorine as a weapon and has held back rockets capable of carrying a chemical warhead of a type used in the sarin gas attacks in the Ghouta district of Damascus last August, for fear of directly implicating Bashar al Assad's regime. The Ghouta attacks are believed to have killed about 1,400 people.
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) announced on Tuesday that 86% of the declared stockpile – including nearly 90% of the highest priority, most lethal, agents – had been delivered to the Mediterranean port of Latakia by the Assad government and loaded on to Scandinavian freighters in preparation for eventual destruction.
The remaining 14% of the total declared stock is either on the road to Latakia or at a single remaining inland site, being put in special containers and prepared for road transport. Officials say that if all goes according to plan, it could be loaded at Latakia by the 27 April target date set by Damascus, having missed the original OPCW deadline by some months. If there is a hitch, they said it could be a few days more, but the removal of the stockpile should be complete by the end of the month.
However, western governments believe Syria's original declaration was not complete and that it was holding some munitions and material back.
"We believe Syria has declared the vast bulk of its chemical weapon stockpile, but not everything" a British official said, adding that the conclusion was grounded on knowledge of Syria's military and dual-purpose imports over the years.
"This is based on intelligence over a very long period, where things have gone to Syria over a long period and haven't been accounted for. For example they have not declared the weapons used in the Ghouta chemical attack, which is not surprising as they continue to deny carrying it out, despite the evidence in the Sellstrom report. If it handed over those rockets it would be tantamount to admitting they did it."
In March, UN human rights investigators concluded that the sarin used in Ghouta and in another incident in April 2013 probably came from the government arsenal. In January, Ake Sellstrom, a Swedish scientist who led a UN investigation into the attacks, said it was difficult to see how rebels could have weaponised the toxins.
Once the handover of the declared stockpile is complete, OPCW inspectors are expected to continue to press Damascus with more questions on materials that may not have been included in Syria's original inventory. Meanwhile, western officials said there is mounting evidence that the Syrian regime is using chlorine as a weapon by dropping improvised barrel bombs from helicopters containing cylinders of the gas. Possession of chlorine is not a violation of the chemical weapons convention, but its use as a weapon is a breach.
"Any use of chlorine is a clear breach of the chemical weapons convention and a war crime. It was the first chemical weapon used in the first world war," a British official said. "The grey area in the CWC is about riot control measures. Chlorine can never be a riot control measure. This is not a grey area."
