The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), which has been given the job of helping end the unrest in eastern Lamberto Zannier, an Italian diplomat who is secretary general of the monitoring and conflict-resolution body, described the OSCE's current access to the flashpoints of the region as "mixed".
"There are some places where the population come to talk to us to find out who we are, and engage with us, and some cases where we come to roadblocks and we are turned back," Zannier told the Guardian in a telephone interview from OSCE headquarters in Vienna, after the organisation was given the task of monitoring and implementing Thursday's Geneva agreement on a plan to defuse the crisis.
The agreement, between Britain's foreign secretary, William Hague, assured his Ukrainian counterpart, Andrii Deshchytsia, on Friday that the UK would press for a further wave of sanctions "if Russia does not follow through".
The EU had agreed to expand its list of Russians and Russian companies to be subjected to visa bans and asset freezes. The extended list was expected to take effect on Friday. But its implementation has been suspended until next week, pending an assessment of Russia's implementation of the Geneva agreement.
The US secretary of state, John Kerry, also said that Washington would give Russia until next week before deciding whether the next wave of US sanctions should be applied.
As the arbiter of progress on the ground, it is clear that the OSCE faces a daunting and delicate task.
"It is very sensitive politically working in a very polarised environment," Zannier said. "We need to explain carefully who we are."
The organisation has its origins during the cold war as the Conference for Security and Co-operation in It has played a leading role organising elections and overseeing peace agreements in the countries of former Yugoslavia, and monitoring Georgia's borders from 2000 to 2005 when Russia vetoed a continuation of its mandate.
Until Vladimir Putin, Russia has been a vociferous critic of the OSCE, arguing that its role supporting democratisation and human rights was skewed against the states of the former Soviet Union. In its new mission in Ukraine, however, it will depend heavily on Russian co-operation, in view of Moscow's influence over the separatists.
Zannier said that influence would be most immediately helpful in securing OSCE access across the region. "Everyone who has influence is welcome to help out," he said. "It is in Russia's interest that the whole region is not destabilised.
"Within the organisation there has been a debate on what should be our activities. I think this debate is still there," Zannier said. "I think the Ukraine situation shows it is a common interest, and not taking steps would result in further violence destabilising the whole region, even Russia."
The OSCE has 100 monitors in the region for its current mission, and is increasing that to 150 by pulling in staff from Bosnia and Moldova. Zannier said his target was to field 500 monitors in eastern Ukraine and he would be asking member states to send qualified people at a meeting on Tuesday.
Beyond the immediate steps in reducing street violence, the Geneva agreement requires the OSCE to help the Kiev government conduct an extensive public consultation prior to framing a new constitution that would give greater autonomy to the provinces.
"It is an internal matter, but our only comment is that it should be an inclusive process and not divisive. We can help organise roundtables where people can sit down and discuss issues when the government has trouble organising that."
