The Hague all but closed down for the arrival of 53 world leaders in the small picturesque city. It shut a runway at the nearest airport, Amsterdam's Schiphol, so there would be enough room for the visitors to park their jets for the two-day meeting. A large area of the city was cordoned off and so many roads were closed that the centre was almost deserted.
The city has seen the staging of the third Nuclear Security Summit as an opportunity to bolster its identity as a global centre for peace and justice, rivalling Geneva. The meeting is being held on the site of the war crimes tribunal and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, now playing a key role in Syria.
Dutch hosts of previous summits have sought to play up the quirky, unconventional nature of their country.
At the 1997 EU summit, they tried to persuade European leaders to go from the meeting hall to lunch on bicycles, with unhappy results that still make Dutch officials wince.
The German chancellor, Helmut Kohl, refused to go anywhere near a bike, shouting: "I am not a monkey!" The Finnish president, Martti Ahtisaari, who was almost as bulky, had to be supported in the saddle by aides. The newly elected Tony Blair turned the jaunt into a serious race, so he could demonstrate Britain was once more "leading in Europe". His aides picked the best bike and made sure it was in good working order, allowing their man to sail pass Europe's older leaders and dismount while they were still puffing away.
This time, the Dutch dropped the idea of bicycles. Instead, they turned down the lights in the chamber and treated the summit to a multimedia presentation. It started with a film in which a glowing, radioactive-looking baton landed at the feet of a surprised citizen who picked it up only to find himself dragged along by its mysterious powers.
As he passed by, others followed dancing through the streets, going by illustrations of everything the The summit was focused on how to lock up the world's nuclear materials more securely so they would not be so easy for terrorists to steal, but inevitably this long-term goal was partly overshadowed by short-term concerns over In the margins, the country's foreign minister, Andrii Deshchytsia, told journalists that he looked forward to meeting his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, for the first time to talk peace and maybe even have a vodka together.
Within half an hour, half his wish was granted. A picture was issued by the Russian foreign minister showing the two men staring grimly across a bare white table, with small flags, white flowers and mineral water between them. No vodka and, going by the body language, no closer to peace, either.
