As for what would constitute a threat, the Russian president made clear that definitions of such words would very much be at his discretion. He defined the military takeover of Crimea as a "humanitarian mission" to save all Ukrainians from mortal peril, although no such danger had been apparent to the great majority of Crimea residents at the time of the incursion.
As for the heavily armed, tightly co–ordinated groups who took over Crimea's airports and ports at the start of the incursion – they were merely spontaneous "self-defence groups" who may have acquired their Russian-looking uniforms from local shops.
It was designed as a relaxed televised chat with a small group of invited journalists by a relaxed leader in full command of the situation. But it became a rambling, often tetchy performance from Putin, repeatedly scolding journalists for failing to understand him, or for leaving their mobile phones on.
But amid the irritability and hectoring, there were some clear messages. First of all, Russian feels bound by no international legal constraints on its actions in "If it's a revolution, what does that mean? It's hard not to agree that a new government is appearing in this country, just like in That in turn brought up the burning question of whether the ambition of current military options ranged further than Crimea to the largely pro-Moscow, Russian-speaking industrial east, potentially slicing Ukraine in two. Putin clearly, very deliberately, left the option open.
"I want you to understand if we make this decision we will make it to protect the people of Ukraine," Putin said.
He shrugged off the threat of sanctions, and poured scorn on western countries who have criticised his actions, yet had themselves pursued legally dubious adventures in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya.
But did Russia's invasion of Crimea not somewhat undermine Moscow's positions on other global conflicts, in which it had nailed its colours to the mast of non-interference in the affairs of other states? Ukraine was different, Putin insisted.
"This is legitimate and corresponds with our interests of protecting people who are historically tied to us, who have cultural ties to us, who have economic ties … This is a humanitarian mission. We won't dictate anything to anyone but of course we won't stand aside if people are threatened," he said.
Putin's new relativism over non-interference and inviolability of borders raised incidentally the prospect of a possible geopolitical trade-off. He drew a parallel between Crimea and Kosovo. Moscow has thus far staunchly refused to recognise Kosovo's independence from its ally, Serbia. Today, the president seemed to raise the possibility that he might accept Kosovo if the west accepted Crimean independence or annexation by Russia.
At the same time, Putin appeared to draw some new lines in the Ukrainian impasse that could open the path to compromise. He insisted that ousted Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych, had been unconstitutionally removed in what he portrayed as a putsch by extremists trained in Poland and Lithuania and orchestrated by the puppet masters in Washington. But he also unceremoniously threw his erstwhile ally under a bus.
"He has no political future. I told him so," Putin said, and decried the extent of Ukrainian corruption and cronyism which blossomed under Yanukovych and which he argued were excessive "even by Russian standards".
Given the venality of the system, Putin even said he could empathise with the protesters in Maidan square. Moreover, he said the Ukrainian parliament and its minister retained democratic legitimacy in his eyes, albeit partially, and his government would continue to do business with them, and that the way out of the military standoff would be the 25 May election and a possible new constitution to be hammered out.
These were the olive branches Putin came carrying, albeit ones delivered by Russian tanks. Putin's constant hints at his military options made it clear that those developments would have to unfold in ways acceptable to Moscow.
"If the same terror that is happening in Kiev" was repeated, he warned, Moscow would not respect the outcome of the May vote. As Crimea demonstrated, Putin has a very low threshold for what constitutes "terror" against Russian interests. So for eastern Ukraine, Putin's sword was left unsheathed and ready.
