US officials are contemplating unfreezing some of the tens of billions dollars of Iranian assets in blocked accounts around the world, to give them bargaining chips to take the table with Iran, now that substantive negotiations have finally begun, the New York Times reports today. 
The report, which echoes a similar account by Jeffrey Goldberg on Bloomberg, suggests US negotiators are looking for ways of unshackling themselves from congressionally-imposed sanctions so they have room for manouevre when the nuclear talks with Iran resume in Iran on November 7.
Even as western diplomats enthused as the new mood in this week's talks with the Iranians, senators were preparing a new round of sanctions aimed at strangling off Iran's remaining oil revenue. 
The announcement of a new raft of sanctions would be highly toxic to the domestic political standing of the newly-elected Hassan Rouhani and his foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, who is already near-immobilised by back problems he says were brought on by hardliner attacks. Rouhani and Zarif have staked everything on persuading Iranians that their strategy of engagement with the West will pay early dividends. A further tightening of sanctions will suggest the opposite is true.
It will be up to the lead US negotiator at Geneva, under secretary of state Wendy Sherman, to try to persuade the Senate to hold off new punitive measures, which have already been approved by the House of Representatives. In Geneva, a senior US administration official sounded confident that Congress could be persuaded:
If we have what I call the high-class problem of a verifiable and sound agreement that addresses all of the international community's concerns about Iran's nuclear program and assures the world that Sherman has somewhat boxed herself in with her last Senate appearance, making the benchmark for success in the first Geneva round an Iranian plan for "concrete, substantive actions". It is not clear whether the PowerPoint presentation by Zarif rises to that level. It has thus far been shrouded in secrecy. Sherman will probably brief the Senate foreign relations commitee behind closed doors, though that is hardly a guarantee against it leaking from some sceptical senator's office.
The most plausible and detailed account of the Zarif proposal so far has come from Iran expert, Barbara Slavin, on Al Monitor.
Quoting "an Iranian source who has proven reliable in the past", Slavin says the Iranian opening offer includes a halt to production of 20% enriched uranium and the conversion of the current stockpile into fuel rods for the Tehran Research Reactor, as a reassurance it would not be used one day as raw material for a bomb. 
Also according to the report, Iran would keep its underground uranium-enrichment plant in Fordow running, and complete the heavy water reactor in Arak, but both under strict international monitoring and controls. Spent fuel from Arak would be exported so Iran would not be able to extract the plutonium from it. Iran would ultimately sign the Additional Protocol of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) which allows inspectors freer range when it comes to choosing sites to inspect.
There is no confirmation that this version is accurate. Zarif has taken to Facebook and Twitter to deny the leaks, saying in rough translation: "Those who talk, don't know; and those who know, don't talk". But Slavin's version does sound similar to a less detailed report two days earlier by Michael Adler on the Breaking Defence website.
If these accounts are true, they would explain why all the diplomats emerging from Geneva have mitigated their enthusiasm by sombre warnings there is still a long way to go. Arak and Fordow are potential deal-breakers because they affect the West's bottom line: how long it would take Iran to 'break out' and dash for a bomb, if Tehran decided it wanted to go nuclear. 
If Iran kept Fordow and Arak running, it could break with the IAEA one day, throw out the inspectors, and then there would little the West or Israel could do stop it making nuclear weapons. Bombing Arak would be impossible because it would set a radioactive plume drifting across the region. Fordow, meanwhile, would be near-impregnable. 
These negotiations will ultimately be about Iran providing a long enough "time cushion" between its existing capacity and its ability to produce its first bomb, so that the West and Israel feel reassured they would have time to respond to an Iranian breakout. In return, Iran will be able to do business with the rest of the world without constraints. Both ends of the bargain look a long way away right now but at least they seem to be finally coming into focus.
