In recent years, Iran's refusal to address concerns over its nuclear programme has left the Islamic Republic increasingly isolated on the international stage. Wide-ranging sanctions are crippling the country's economy, and the threat of a military strike on Iranian nuclear facilities continues to loom on the horizon.
In this context, the surprise election of Hassan Rouhani as president in June has infused the Iranian nuclear issue with a new, albeit cautious, sense of optimism. A centrist politician with a taste for pragmatism, Rouhani appears to have made re-engagement with the international community a priority. Since his election, the new president has emphasised his goal of reducing tensions with Western powers and, in a much anticipated speech at the UN, he declared Tehran's willingness to 'remove any and all reasonable concerns about Iran's peaceful nuclear program'.
After almost a decade of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's politics of defiance, the new president's conciliatory tone points towards a new era in Iran's international relations. Rouhani's overtures have been welcomed by Western leaders and in his own speech at the UN, President Obama said there is now 'the basis for a meaningful agreement' with Iran, suggesting a renewed diplomatic effort to resolve the nuclear challenge.
The logic behind Rouhani's approach is clear: with a mandate for change and a reputation as a moderate, Iran's new president has a unique opportunity to ease international pressure on the country. The real question however, is what can we realistically expect to change? How far will Rouhani go in his efforts to resolve the nuclear issue? And, more importantly, how far can he go when ultimately it is Supreme Leader Khamanei who takes the final decision on issues of foreign policy and national security?
When Iran's undeclared nuclear activities were revealed in 2002, the Iranian programme was propelled to the top of the international agenda. Perhaps more importantly, the nuclear programme, previously the preserve of an elite group of decision-makers, was thrust into the domestic arena and opened up to broader political scrutiny for the first time in Iran. In this context, and whatever its aspirations, the regime was forced to fully engage with a peaceful nuclear narrative at the domestic level to secure necessary political support in a notoriously factional environment. Accusations of weapons aspirations were dismissed as the leadership in Tehran stressed that the Iranian nuclear programme was purely for civil purposes.
The impact of this development was enormous, effectively creating significant domestic barriers to the bomb since the Iranian regime was no longer able to move forward with the nuclear programme in as covert a manner as it did pre-2002. In Iran there has long been a strong consensus around the need to advance the nuclear energy programme – mastery of this expensive and technically demanding technology is associated with national advancement and modernity. However, there is no such agreement on nuclear weapons and deviating from the peaceful narrative would be a high-risk strategy for any leader.
Furthermore, as international opposition to Iran's nuclear advancement increased, the debate around the nuclear programme became one of Iranian rights and sovereignty. The nuclear issue emerged as a rallying point for Iranian nationalism and a potent source of support for the regime. It was not by chance that Ahmadinejad made defiance on the nuclear issue the cornerstone of his presidency.
But investing the nuclear issue with such political and symbolic significance has had important consequences. The nuclear programme has gained an organic momentum that has constrained the regime's room for diplomatic manoeuvre.
This is not to suggest that Iran's nuclear trajectory has outstripped the regime's intentions or aspirations. There is considerable evidence that Iran's nuclear activities extend beyond what is necessary for a civil programme. Indeed there is a widely held perception that with respect to nuclear weapons Tehran is, to quote Churchill, pursuing 'the art rather than the article'. In other words, many observers believe that Iran is hedging its bets; attempting to acquire the wherewithal to be capable of manufacturing nuclear weapons but without actually crossing the threshold - at least not until some perceived security imperative prompts a political decision to do so.
In a general sense, this interpretation appears to be accurate. Iran is moving ever-closer to a weapons capability in line with a strategy that appears to be based on hedging. Crucially, however, Iran's behaviour is a very particular form of hedging shaped primarily by domestic politics. In fact, the evidence suggests that Tehran's hedging approach has developed as much through domestic political circumstance as it has through a grand strategic design.
So what does this mean in the context of President Rouhani's diplomatic overtures? Is there hope for a mutually acceptable solution to the nuclear issue?
If there is to be a diplomatic agreement it must be based on realistic and achievable goals. Given the significance of the nuclear issue in Iran, and the developed state of the programme, it is not feasible to expect decision-makers in Tehran to risk the domestic political backlash of agreeing to a significant roll back of its existing capability. Iran certainly will not agree to give up enrichment because this is a core part of the domestic narrative with. The leadership in Tehran has consistently emphasised the country's 'right' under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty to pursue peaceful development of nuclear energy-related capabilities.
A more realistic goal is to focus on containing Iranian technical advancements and placing limits on further progress. Such an approach will entail an implicit acceptance of Iran's particular form of hedging and this will not, of course, be palatable to all parties, particularly Israel. But to expect anything else may be overly optimistic given the domestic political constraints around which President Rouhani must navigate.
Of course, the limits of containment are open to debate and there are a number of key issues to be considered, from enrichment levels to stocks of fissile material. In principle, however, this would involve keeping Iran some way away from a credible breakout capability, but at the same time allowing Tehran to retain its programme in some form.
The trade-off here would need to include limiting the enrichment programme to the 3-5% enriched uranium relevant to the production of fuel for power reactors; recognising, of course, that Iran has already enriched to 20% and this has contributed significantly to widespread concern over intentions in the weapons area, where around 90% is required. Iran is likely to come under pressure to close its Fordow facility in order to consolidate all enrichment activities on the one site at Natanz. Moreover, Iran will certainly be expected to be more transparent and agree to increased oversight of its nuclear activities. The Iranian Parliament would, for example, have to ratify and fully implement the Additional Protocol to its IAEA safeguards agreement, with IAEA inspectors being provided with all necessary access and support to verify declared activities and rule out any further undeclared work.
For the Iranian leadership to make such concessions on the nuclear programme, it will need to be able to sell the overall package as a 'win' for Iranian diplomacy. Allowing Rouhani and his colleagues to save face in this respect is important because the nuclear programme enjoys support across the political spectrum in Iran, and past experience has shown that any move that might be perceived as a loss is sure to invite political attack. In this context, Rouhani can only go so far without losing political credibility at home, so the international community will need to show flexibility.
But this approach need not be a 'loss' for western powers. The diplomatic back and forth of recent years has achieved no concrete results. The Iranian programme has marched on and Tehran moves ever closer to the bomb. A continuation along this path is likely to result in military action because Israel is unlikely to stand by and watch Iran approach the nuclear weapons threshold. So, by recognising the complexity of the situation, and taking steps to contain Iran's nuclear programme rather than seeking rollback, the international community has an opportunity to achieve a realistic solution to the Iranian nuclear challenge. Some will argue that such an approach rewards bad behaviour, but the reality is, the window for negotiating with Iranian moderates will not remain open for long if the outside world fails to act pragmatically on the nuclear issue.
