Britain has pledged £100m more funding to help cope with the humanitarian disaster caused by the Syrian conflict, bringing the UK's contribution to half a billion pounds and making it the country's biggest ever relief effort, The deputy prime minister urged other governments involved in talks on chemical weapon use and the possible resumption of peace talks not to forget the plight of the millions of Syrians already displaced and hungry as a result of the fighting.
"As the international community comes together to reach political solutions, we cannot avert our gaze from the Syrian people, especially children, who need help now," Clegg said at the UN general assembly in New York.
An Oxfam report, published before the latest aid was announced, found that the UK was giving significantly more than its fair share, calculated as a proportion of national income, to the UN Clegg said: "The UK has been leading the charge to alleviate suffering through the Syria UN appeals. But there's a huge gap in what's needed. I've been pushing other countries at the UN general assembly to help meet the shortfall."
The UN appeal for Syria is only 44% funded. The new British funding will pay for food for 87,000 people and access to clean water for 295,000 people; shelter for more than 118,500 people forced out of their homes by the fighting; and medical consultations for 80,000 people, British officials said.
But the scale of the disaster is daunting. The UN estimates that 100,000 have been killed as a result of the conflict in Syria. There are 2 million refugees, half of them children. Furthermore, 6.8 million are in need of assistance within Syria. At least 4.25 million in Syria have been forced to flee their homes for other areas of the country.
Oxfam said that children inside Syria, cut off from food aid and medical care, were trying to survive on fruit, nuts and leaves.
"This is a huge further British commitment. The UK is really leading the world in terms of humanitarian support," said Justin Forsyth, the chief executive of Save the Children . "But the real problem in Syria is the access, getting help across borders and frontlines. We need a UN security council resolution to allow aid agencies access across borders."
"There is intense diplomacy on the chemical attacks, but the danger is that it sucks up all the leadership and draws it away from this very important issue," Forsyth said. "Even if the security council can't agree on anything else, surely they can agree that Syrian children should get help."
A spokeswoman for Britain's Department for International Development said: "The world risks failing a generation of Syrians if aid agencies don't get safe access to reach people in desperate need inside Syria. That is why at the UN general assembly, the UK is calling for action to implement the UN's proposals for unfettered humanitarian access inside Syria to ensure life-saving aid and medicine reaches the most war-torn areas and the sick and wounded can be evacuated."
