Some things never change. The UN media liaison unit gave both the wrong time and place to pick up badges for the general assembly. When journalists arrived, volunteers were still being trained. The badge-printing computers did not function properly. 
But the wrinkles were dealt with in good humour by a multinational, multilingual team. And it all came out right in the end. It was more endearing than irritating. 
The UN has many flaws, but if it were ever abolished it would immediately have to be reinvented. The world needs somewhere to meet and talk. It beats the alternatives. That is true even in average years when leaders simply come to deliver pre-cooked monologues. And this is no average year.
With the newly-elected Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, flying in to New York for his UN debut, a genuine drama is brewing. On Tuesday, Obama will take to the podium in the morning. Rouhani will follow in the afternoon. We do not know what either will say. We do not know what doors they will open. We don't know if they will make history and meet face to face. 
The potential for disappointment is huge. Humans are hard-wired for optimism and tend to project that optimism on to their leaders, usually unwisely. But on this occasion, Rouhani is stoking expectations with every passing day, pledging to present nothing less than a new Iran on the world stage. 
There is little doubt Rouhani will deliver the rhetoric. The devil as ever will be in the fine print. It may be that the Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei, has empowered him to make a deal that critically falls short of international expectations, in the hope that the momentum building around Rouhani would bounce the West into giving away more than it intended.
It does seem likely that Obama is prepared to be flexible to ensure that Rouhani is not undermined at home, and to keep diplomacy in play. But he cannot accept a deal that does not significantly push back and restrain Iranian capacity to make a nuclear weapon in the future.
The contours of the Rouhani negotiating position will emerge in the coming days. The foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif will meet his counterparts, including John Kerry, on Thursday. Ultimately, however, the moment of truth will only come when Khamenei has to approve whatever is tentatively agreed in New York or Geneva.
The last moderate Iranian president, Mohammad Khatami, understood only too well that nothing could be achieved without the trust and confidence of the Supreme Leader. But Khatami suggests in The Guardian today that Rouhani is in a better position from that point of view than he was:
Explicit public support from the supreme leader of the Islamic republic provides Rouhani and his colleagues with the necessary authority for a diplomatic resolution of a number of foreign policy issues with the west, not just the nuclear issue.

Nobody outside Khamenei's tightest circle knows his mind for sure. But arguably he has let expectations rise to such heights this time that - assuming the US and allies to not dramatically botch their hand - he cannot pull back from the brink of a historic breakthrough without inflicting considerable political damage on himself and on the Islamic Republic.
