The Syrian declaration, marking its first formal accounting of a chemical weapons programme, was delivered to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), a spokesman confirmed. "We have received some documentation and there is more to come."
The Syrian document was being studied by OPCW weapons experts before being passed to member states on the organisation's governing executive council.
"The OPCW has announced that it has received an initial disclosure from the Syrian government of its chemical weapons programme which is now being examined by the technical secretariat of the organisation," a spokesman for the British foreign office said. "The OPCW has not yet made this disclosure available to states parties."
As a result, a meeting of the executive council was postponed until next week, which in turn appeared likely to push back a planned UN security council meeting intended to lay down a plan to disarm Syria in the wake of US-Russian agreement last Saturday.
Part of the reason for the delay was procedural, the foreign office said.
"Syria is a unique case. It has made this disclosure as a non-state party. The coming OPCW executive council needs to endorse a new process to handle Syria's chemical weapons. Once this has been achieved the OPCW will be in a position to make the Syrian disclosure available to states parties," the spokesman said.
Meanwhile, the party of the Syrian deputy prime minister, Qadri Jamil, sought yesterday to retract Jamil's statement in a Guardian interview that the government was seeking a ceasefire. The People-Want party said Jamil was speaking in his party role rather than for the government.
However, the interview was conducted in a government building and was arranged by a government information officer. A translator confirmed that the comments on the ceasefire were made in Jamil's capacity of deputy prime minister.
A British diplomat reacted dismissively last night to the suggestion of a ceasefire from Damascus.
"We must view with scepticism any talk about peace from a regime that has repeatedly lied and brutally murdered its own people," the diplomat said.
"It is the regime that is responsible for starting this conflict with its violent response to peaceful protesters asking for more democracy. It can stop killing its own citizens at any time, but chooses not to. It could have accepted a ceasefire at any point, but it has chosen not to. If it is serious about peace, it should demonstrate this with concrete steps on the ground to stop killing Syrian people."
