A veteran In a rare interview, Agha Jan Motasim, who was finance minister in the Taliban regime, said statements issued in recent years in the name of the insurgent leader Mullah Omar have not reflected the fugitive cleric's true views.
"Unfortunately there are hardliners and extremists in the movement who use his name. If his messages were by video or audio, we would know it was him. But there are warmongers who have taken over his name and are putting out their own message with it," Motasim told the Guardian. Since he was wounded in an assassination attempt in Karachi two years ago, Motasim has lived in exile in Ankara.
There have been no verified recordings or sightings of Omar since his government fell and he fled to Pakistan in 2001, allowing various factions to claim to be acting in his name. There has also been speculation that the one-eyed former village cleric had died.
According to Motasim, Omar is alive but has lost control of the Taliban's public statements and communications with the outside world because his life on the run from the threat of drone attacks has ruled out regular contact with his followers.
"You have to appreciate that Mullah Omar lives in a difficult predicament. He is living in different places. He is not able to broadcast his ideas. He is on a blacklist with a bounty on his head," said Motasim. "The international community bears responsibility for this. Anyone who offers information on his whereabouts gets a reward."
Last month, the latest of the traditional Eid messages issued in Mullah Omar's name raised the possibility of a power-sharing government but ruled out a ceasefire, insisting the Taliban's enemies were being "thrashed" and would soon collapse.
Motasim said rank-and-file insurgents are less gung-ho. "A majority of the Taliban believe there is no military solution. They accept that the way out is a dialogue leading to peace. The Taliban realise that if they succeed on the battlefield it will be no success.
"It can't run a government on its own. If we get to Kabul, the first thing we'll need is doctors and others who are not with us. After all the bloodletting, we would have to work with people we are fighting."
Motasim is a former head of the political committee of the Taliban's ruling council, the Quetta Shura. He was accused by the leadership of embezzlement in 2009, but he denies any wrongdoing and insists he was never found guilty of any charge. Western diplomats believe he was ousted principally because of unauthorised efforts to set up peace talks.
He was shot multiple times in an assassination attempt on a Karachi street in August 2011, after which he fled to Turkey. He says it is unclear who tried to kill him. Western diplomats believe it was either al-Qaida or an extreme Taliban faction.
Jostling within the Taliban leadership is likely to be fuelled by the expected release on Saturday of Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar after three years in Pakistani detention. Baradar is a former rival of Motasim who was widely considered to be in day-to-day control of Taliban operations and leaning towards peace talks at the time of his arrest, leading to accusations that the Pakistani security apparatus was trying to sabotage a political settlement in Afghanistan.
Motasim said he still considers himself a Taliban leader and claims to have retained considerable influence in the movement.
"I have support among all our Taliban, including the fighters and those in the media. I give advice and they come to me for advice," he said. "Not only am I a Taliban leader but I am a very active Taliban leader. I am best able to project Mullah Omar's ideas. I will lead a moderate Taliban movement towards a peace resolution."
He argued he was in a better position to lead in Ankara than in Pakistan. "Here I have better security and I am more able to keep in contact with the movement. I am directly in touch with area commanders in the south, east and west," he said.
A western source in regular contact with the Taliban confirmed recently witnessing a group of insurgent commanders consulting Motasim by Skype, and said such consultations were common.
"His significance has been largely untapped so far," said Alex Strick van Linschoten, the author of several books on the Taliban. "The longer he sits in Turkey, the less clout he will have, but he could play an extremely useful role if engaged in the right way. All of this is dependent on whether Karzai will allow this to happen."
Previous rounds of Afghan peace talks split the Taliban rank and file and the latest effort in Qatar collapsed in June when the government of President Hamid Karzai objected to the display of a Taliban flag outside its office in Doha and a plaque on the building inscribed: "Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan", the country's official name under the Taliban regime.
Motasim said both sides were at fault in allowing such issues of protocol to obstruct the peace process. He said there was broad support for a peace settlement and argued that there is room for substantial compromise on key issues such as girls' education.
"The Taliban of today is not the same as the Taliban of 12 years ago. We were scattered across the world and have seen a lot of the world," Motasim said. "I am an example. My family is both boys and girls and all are educated. My daughter has a master's degree and I hope she goes on to get a PhD. It is equally important for girls to be educated as boys."
