The Russian and Iranian foreign ministers have claimed there has been a significant breakthrough at nuclear talks in Lausanne, which resumed on Wednesday morning.American diplomats denied the agreement had been finalised, saying there were still issues to resolve. But in a sign the talks could be approaching a critical moment, Barack Obama held a video-conference on Tuesday night with his national security team to be briefed on developments by the US negotiators: the secretary of state, John Kerry, and the energy secretary, Ernest Moniz.
The talks went past a midnight deadline but appeared to have gathered momentum as they approached the cutoff point.
The Chinese foreign minister, Wang Li, said in statement on Wednesday there had been “significant progress in core issues” and the positions of all parties involved in the talks had become closer.
“One can say with relative certainty that we at the minister level have reached an agreement in principle on all key aspects of the final settlement of this issue,” Russian media quoted the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, as saying.
After a marathon 17-hour day of talks, ministers from seven nations adjourned just after the midnight deadline and agreed to reconvene at 9am Lausanne time.
Speaking to reporters after midnight, Iran’s foreign minister, Javad Zarif, said: “It has been a very long day for all delegations. We have accomplished quite a bit but people needed to get some rest and start over early in the morning.
“I hope that we can finalise the work on Wednesday and hopefully start the process of drafting tomorrow.”
Before the expected ministerial meeting on Wednesday, a preparatory session by senior diplomats was due to start at 6.30am in the attempt to draft text acceptable to At stake is a preliminary accord, which would lay out the framework of a comprehensive agreement, recording the main points of compromise by both sides. If it is successful it would be followed by three months of talks to add detail and technical annexes.
The full agreement, due to be completed at the end of June, would impose strict limits on the Iranian nuclear programme so that the international community could be confident it would have a year’s warning if the government in Tehran decided to build a bomb.
A German diplomatic source said the mood as the day wore on was “alternating” between hope and frustation, with negotiations frequently broken off for consultations in smaller groups.
The end-of-March cutoff date was the third deadline to come and go in the past eight months. This time however there is new urgency because the US Congress is threatening to pass new legislation when it returns from recess in mid-April that could lead to the rejection of an agreement and new sanctions on Iran.
“Our experts and diplomats are working very hard around the clock to see if we can get to an agreement. Our team is evaluating where we are throughout the day and making decisions about the best path forward,” said a senior US state department official on Tuesday.
A convention centre at the Swiss National Technical Institute in Lausanne has been prepared for the announcement of a deal if the final breakthrough can be made. In that case a joint declaration would be made by Zarif and the EU foreign policy chief, Frederica Mogherini. But it is unclear how many details of any agreement would be released.
The Iranians are reluctant to release information as it would make it easier for hardliners to attack it before the completion date at the end of June. The Wang left the talks to return to China on Tuesday evening and was followed in the early hours of the morning by his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius. Fabius’s office said he would return “as soon as it is useful”.