Israel's attack on Gaza opened a new chapter in the use of social media in warfare, as both the Israeli Defence Forces and Hamas's armed wing, the al-Qassam Brigades, kept up duelling live Twitter feeds, each giving their side of the conflict.
The fact that both Twitter accounts, @IDFSpokesperson and @AlqassamBrigades, launched the live commentaries in English minutes after the drone assassination of the Hamas military commander, Ahmed al-Jabari, underlined the central importance to each side of coralling world opinion in the conflict.
The IDF tweeted the launch of the operation, shortly after announcing the end of the Austere Challenge 12 joint military exercises with US European Command with the words: "All good things must come to an end." The IDF then tweeted: "The IDF has begun a widespread campaign on terror sites & operatives in the #Gaza Strip, chief among them #Hamas & Islamic Jihad targets."
Soon after it added: "The first target, hit minutes ago, was Ahmed Al-Jabari, head of the #Hamas military wing."
Within moments, @AlqassamBrigade confirmed Jabari's death, saying he had been "assassinated by #Israeli drones in #Gaza", and in the next tweet declared: "Occupation opened hell gates on itself." Three hours later it said that al-Qassam had shelled an Israeli mlitary base in Beer Sheva "with dozens of mortars" in response to the Jabari killing.
Each side in the Twitter duel that unfolded over the following day sought to outdo the other in attempting to draw a mass audience, occasionally taunting each other directly. @IDFSpokesperson linked to an aerial video of Jabari's car detonated by the missile – footage which was then taken down by YouTube on the grounds that it "violated the terms of service" – and then a red wanted poster of his alleged actions stamped in block letters with the word "Eliminated". It tweeted: "We recommend that no Hamas operatives, whether low level or senior leaders, show their faces above ground in the days ahead."
@AlqassamBrigade replied rapidly: "Our blessed hands will reach your leaders and soldiers wherever they are (You Opened Hell Gates on Yourselves)."
The IDF also attracted criticism for the jokey tone of updates by some of its members on Al-Qassam kept up a parallel feed in Arabic while the IDF Twitter feed runs a French version, @Tsahal-IDF, as well as a Spanish and French version of its Facebook page.
The Nato-run International Security Assistance Force (Isaf) in Afghanistan and Taliban both have a recent history of exchanging taunts on Twitter, but this is the first time the medium was used to give live commentary on an ongoing conflict.
