The Foreign Office has opened a new crisis centre to help rescue British citizens trapped abroad by political upheavals or natural disasters, in an effort to prevent a repeat of the delays in evacuating Britons from Libya last year.
The evacuation fiasco in February 2011 left hundreds of UK nationals in Tripoli, Benghazi and in the desert oilfields after airlines cancelled flights. The government found it hard to find chartered planes to replace them, and one of them broke down before take-off, drawing an apology from the prime minister and prompting the foreign secretary, William Hague, to order a review of evacuation procedures.
"The problems themselves were difficult to foresee. At one point, a series of aircraft didn't fly for a variety of reasons including technical breakdown. But whenever things like that happen we have to be better prepared next time, so I think things like that were a clear lesson that some things had to be changed and improved," Hague said.
"The main practical lesson was even more redundancy. If you've got a plane going to rescue people, you need another one that is on standby. Or another two. If you think you're going to need two, you perhaps need four. These are always difficult decisions because the more planes you have the more expensive it is. You need more redundancy, more capacity to deal with these events."
The crisis centre, in the basement of the Foreign Office, has a video wall so that multiple live feeds can be projected at the same time. At the launch event it displayed a map of the world showing 13 countries where British officials have rehearsed crisis and evacuation procedures over the past years.
The centre is equipped with interactive whiteboards that allow maps of the crisis region to be called up and marked with evacuation plans which are then sent to British missions around the world.
A feed of information comes in from government agencies such as the British Geological Survey, for information on earthquakes and tsunamis, and the Health Protection Agency, for information on any emerging pandemics, for example. Digital clocks on the walls display the time in the Maldives, Cairo, Washington, Hong Kong, London and Mexico.
The aim of the centre, which has a permanent staff of 28 and a total surge capacity of 110, is to be able to handle two global crises at the same time. Hague said that drew on the other lesson from 2011, which was that crises did not necessarily come along one at a time.
"There was the New Zealand earthquake and the Japan tsunami which were very close to each other," the foreign secretary said. "The sheer volume of events and the numbers of British nationals caught up in a whole series of political events and natural disasters … that's made it necessary to upgrade the crisis centre."
The Foreign Office has also created a new rapid deployment team for the Middle East and south Asia, which will include consular issues, counsellors, logistics experts and, when necessary, police disaster victims identification units, and can now draw on more than 170 trained volunteers from Foreign Office staff who can be deployed around the world at a few hours' notice.
"People often ask what do you do when you're not in crisis, and I say we almost always are dealing with a crisis," said Juliet Maric, head of the crisis management department. "There is almost always something we are watching or monitoring or tracking, or if not we are planning and preparing or training and exercising."
