Mohamed Morsi, addressing the President Morsi called for the replacement of the regime with a democratic government representative of all the country's ethnic and religious groups, but said this should be done without outside military intervention. Instead, he pointed to a new diplomatic initiative begun by Before discussing the Syrian conflict, Morsi said the UN should make a priority of addressing the plight of the Palestinian people, saying that it was "shameful" that successive UN resolutions on the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories had not been enforced.
"The fruits of dignity and freedom must not remain far from the Palestinian people," he said.
In his maiden speech to the UN general assembly, Morsi said the people of the Middle East would no longer tolerate dictatorship, nor would they tolerate countries that did not sign the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT), a clear reference to Israel, whose nuclear arsenal gives it a monopoly in the region. He voiced support to a UN-sponsored conference due by the end of the year to promote the Middle East as a region free of weapons of mass destruction. But Morsi also had an oblique rebuke for Iran, saying that all countries should also demonstrate the peaceful nature of their nuclear programmes to the satisfaction of their neighbours. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has said that Morsi's assessment of the region's problems came in stark contrast to the address delivered by the Iranian president, Ahmadinejad's speech was unusually esoteric for a UN session and made only one political reference to Israel, when he denounced what he called the "hegemony of arrogance" of the world's dominant powers, and said the "continued threat by the uncivilized Zionists to resort to military action against our great nation is a clear example of this bitter reality".
No American diplomats were in the chamber for Ahmadinejad's speech because of what Washington viewed as offensive remarks the Iranian leader had made about Israel earlier in the week. British and other European states mostly sent junior representatives, who did not walk out as they had on previous occasions.
"They were primed to walk out if he [Ahmadinejad] said something grossly offensive as he usually does, but this time he just seemed incoherent and incredibly boring. It was hard to make out what he wanted to say," a European diplomat said. "He seems to be losing his knack a bit."
As Ahmadinejad spoke in what is last address to the UN before a presidential election, his influence at home appeared to be ebbing under pressure from his political enemies. One of his closest aides, Ali Akbar Javanfekr, the director of the state news agency Irna, was jailed on Tuesday for "publishing materials contrary to Islamic norms".
In his remarks, Morsi said Egypt would "stand firmly" against the anti-American violence that has swept the Islamic world in recent weeks and was triggered by the emergence of a crude video denigrating the prophet Mohamed, which was made by an Nakoula Basseley Nakoula, an Egyptian American Coptic Christian.
But Morsi also claimed that the dissemination of that video was part of an "organised campaign" fuelled by Islamophobia. In what appeared to be a riposte to Barack Obama's staunch defence of the freedom of expression in his own address to the general assembly, Morsi said that free speech should not include the right to insult the religious faith of millions of people.
