Egypt's new leader, Morsi's participation at the summit of the Non-Aligned Movement of developing countries in Tehran on Thursday will mark the first visit by an Egyptian leader since the 1979 Islamic revolution and a substantial departure from the foreign policy of the deposed dictator Hosni Mubarak.
Morsi will reportedly stay only a few hours in what will be a largely symbolic trip, but it is intended to lay the foundations for a new regional effort to stem the deepening violence in Tehran, meanwhile, is presenting the summit as proof of the failure of western efforts to isolate Morsi, who came to office two months ago, has said he wants to form a Syria contact group made up of Before his Tehran trip, Morsi is due to hold talks in Beijing on Tuesday with the Chinese government, which has stood alongside Russia in opposing punitive measures against the Assad regime at the UN security council.
"Part of the mission is in China, part of the mission is in Russia and part of the mission is in Iran," Morsi's spokesman, Yasser Ali, told the New York Times. It is not clear whether or when Morsi will visit Russia as part of the initiative. Western officials say any attempt to broker peace in Syria will hinge on the role of Moscow, the regime's main sponsor and arms supplier. They argue that without Russian pressure, Assad is unlikely to give up his efforts to crush the insurgency.
However, Peter Harling, a Syria expert at the International Crisis Group, said in light of the failure of the UN and Arab League to make diplomatic progress, any new effort was worthwhile when hundreds of casualties were being reported each day.
"Given how desperate the situation is and the need for some movement on the political front, it's a welcome initiative," Harling said. "In the past, the US opposed any participation of Iran in the contact group, but it makes sense to include Iran in any negotiated transition. Tehran has much to lose and it can cause damage in the region if it is excluded. It is just diplomatic common sense."
Assad met Iranian officials in Damascus on Sunday and was quoted on Syrian state media as saying his regime would carry on fighting "whatever the price".
The intensity of the conflict has dramatically increased in recent weeks, culminating in a government offensive on Daraya on the south-western edge of the capital city.
Various opposition claims have put the death toll in the town at between 300 and 600, many of them civilians, from three days of heavy shelling and then a ground attack on Saturday, when troops and allied militiamen went from door to door.
If the reports are verified, it would be the worst massacre of the 17-month long conflict, which began in March last year with initially peaceful anti-regime protests.
Official restrictions on independent press coverage make it hard to confirm the casualty figures but independent witnesses spoke of seeing scores of bodies in Daraya. Video footage which emerged on Monday showed mass burials.
More video footage from Damascus on Monday  showed a Syrian military helicopter plummet to the ground in flames. The opposition claimed it was brought down in fighting with government forces in the capital. The Syrian official news agency confirmed the crash but gave no details.
