London Olympic stadiums and arenas will be on medals and world records, there will be a team on the ninth floor of Canary Wharf poised for a quite different Olympic challenge: what to do if Israel decides to bomb Iran or some other sudden global crisis erupts in the course of the Games.
The British diplomats, police and Olympic officials who will man the Protocol Co-ordination Centre (PCC) have spent nine months rehearsing gradually worsening scenarios in the hope that – if the worst happens – they will be able to react quickly and smoothly.
Much attention has been paid to the security in place in the event of an attempted terrorist attack on London during the Olympics. But a war or coup abroad could also be a serious complication at a time when up to 120 heads of state or heads of the government will be in the UK over the same few days.
An Israeli attack on Iranian nuclear sites is one contingency practised, and is a significant possibility this summer, particularly as high-level negotiations with Tehran have been suspended.
"We had to think through all the ramifications," a senior British official said. "We had to think of where the national teams would be and what they would need, where are the national leaders and which leaders would have to be brought together? And we had to bear in mind that the Iranians would probably blame us, one way or another."
In such an eventuality, a 24-hour emergency team of diplomats in a specially outfitted Olympic situation room in a basement on King Charles Street in Westminster, called the Foreign (Office) Co-ordination Centre (FCC) would put together a situation report for the Cabinet Office, and get in immediate touch with the PCC. The diplomats, police protection officers, transport specialists and Olympic organisers at Canary Wharf would then identify and anticipate which visiting dignitaries would need extra protection, who would need to meet and who would need to leave.
"If something like that happens then different leaders will respond in different ways," Simon Martin, the Foreign Office head of protocol said. "You might for example come up with another eventuality which required an immediate meeting with heads of state, in which case we would identify a location to gather those heads who are here."
Venues for high-level, super-secure meetings, earmarked months ago as possible meeting places, would be hastily readied, or arrangements made to get foreign leaders to the same place as their planes.
An Israel-Iran conflict is only one of hundreds of different scenarios that the Foreign Office and the Metropolitan police have been rehearsing.
The scenarios were conjured up by planners operating out of the Met's Empress State Building, with officials playing the role of foreign leaders, activists or demanding journalists, bombarding the teams at the PCC, the FCC and the Government Olympic Communications Centre (GOCC), with a succession of fast-moving, threatening and fictitious crises.
"There were four major exercises across government in the past nine months. We steadily increased the seriousness of the scenarios and the last set, in April, were full crises which might cause the United Kingdom reputational harm," said Philip Batson, head of Foreign Office crisis management for the "One involved a fictional country where there was a coup and the coup leader, who was not recognised by the international community, was coming to the country, so what do you do?" Batson said. "Or it might be a terrorist incident. We have to be able to flex between business as usual and something more serious."
The other scenarios played out in the Empress State Building ranged from a vast volcanic ash cloud, like the Icelandic eruptions of the past two years, to a foreign official or a member of an athletic team being arrested. Whatever the situation, the aim is the same. As one official put it: "The aim is for Britain to come out of these Games looking better to the outside world than when we went into them."
A handbook will be produced for use in the PCC that will encapsulate some of the lessons learned in the rehearsals, but official said these lessons would be general and systemic. There will not be a page specifically on what to do if a new Middle East war breaks out. "Too much planning can be a mistake," argued a senior British protocol official drafted in for the Olympics. "You can get locked in. You have to have flexibility."
Even if nothing untoward happens, the challenge of providing for the estimated 120 heads of state and heads of government who are going to converge on southern England, mostly in their own jets, involves extensive planning for the unknown.
First of all, it is not known for sure who is going to come. Government leaders don't have to enter lotteries months in advance to get tickets. They can pretty much decide to come to the Olympics the day before and expect to fly in to crisp, white-gloved VIP service.
The arrival of unwanted visitors in the official delegations had been flagged early. The London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games (Locog) has to submit its accreditation lists to the government to check against its list of "undesirable foreign nationals", but that process affects a relatively tiny numbers. Of the 75,000 officials and athletes who went to the Vancouver Winter Olympics in 2010, only 25 turned out to be "problem cases". But the "desirable" foreign nationals, particularly capricious dignitaries, can be just as much work, if not more.
Of an estimated 120 expected, only 70 foreign leaders had confirmed their attendance as of last week, mostly for the opening ceremony on 27 July. The experience of past Olympic Games is that many will leave it to the last few days to decide, so preparations have to be set in train as if they were coming.
Air traffic control slots have been booked, as well as airport parking space for their planes. One or more of the 150 British diplomats trained as visit officers at a special Locog facility in Hackney will be assigned to them to smooth their way through Britain. Contingency plans have to be ready even for the few leaders who have said no on their RSVP. The Kremlin has informed the UK government that Vladimir Putin will not be coming, for example, but there were reports last week that he might change his mind. The glamour of sporting triumph is hard to resist.
"The big unknown is exactly who is coming in and when, so our entire planning has been on the basis of having to work with that uncertainty and to reduce that uncertainty as much as possible. We are continually in dialogue with foreign missions overseas and with the offices of the heads of state, heads of government to try to pin down their plans and so we have an increasingly clear picture of that," Martin said.
"The great thing is we have had seven years to prepare for this. We have trained for this. It is a national effort. There is a very important relationship between the police protection officer, Foreign Office visit officer and the visit management team – a three-way co-ordination which allows us to make sure that everything is on track and it allows us to be flexible and responsive because we do accept that no matter how clearly agreed our programme is, things change."
Foreign capitals have been sent brochures about the airports available in south-east England for presidential jets, along with a polite reminder that air traffic control slots and airport parking are on a first come, first served basis. They have been told not to even think about coming to Heathrow, which will be full to bursting with commercial traffic.
Motorcycle outriders from the Met's special escort group will be pulled off other duties such as escorting prisoners and high-value cargoes to focus on the criss-crossing itineraries of the visiting VIPs.
Britain's protocol infrastructure has enough slack in it, the organisers believe, to deal with the unexpected. At a push, Foreign Office diplomats say, it could cope with up 130 or 140 heads of state or government, the top end of the estimates. To put that number in perspective, last year the UK played host to about 1,000 foreign leaders, whose visits stretched from mere refuelling stops, to shopping expeditions, to full-scale state occasions.
Many ask for protection, though not all receive it. As a spokesman for the Metropolitan police put it: "Each individual gets a package commensurate with the risk involved. There is a whole range of ways an individual can be protected."
All being well, none of the extreme events planned out in the Empress State Building will come to pass, and the elaborate precautions against the unknown will never be put to the test. The best measure of their success may ultimately be their invisibility.
