The former Bosnian Serb general, Mladic, who is on trial for genocide and other crimes against humanity, sat impassively in a blue-grey suit while Elvedin Pasic gave a harrowing account of his family's escape from their western Bosnian village of Hrvacani in June 1992. The trial was halted several times as Pasic, who was 14 when war erupted, broke down and wept.
He described how Bosnian Muslims were hunted like animals in the forests, suffering one ambush after another. After five months on the run Pasic, his father, his uncle and about 200 other Muslims were captured in November 1992 and made to lie face down in the pouring rain and thick mud. Their Serb guards ordered the women and boys to get to their feet.
"My father told me to get up. I said I don't want to go without you," Pasic recalled through tears. "But my uncle told me: 'Get up. You will survive.'"At one point, the captured men were held on the floor above them but Pasic did not see his father before being put on a bus to be driven to a Muslim area. He and other boys were made to run a gauntlet of local Serb civilians wielding sticks for the 200 metres from the school to the bus. As he was leaving, Pasic said: "I looked up and on second floor [of the school] there was a hand waving ... and I see that hand in my dreams."
Near the end of his testimony, he was asked to read through a list of the Muslim men and boys he had escaped with, ending with his father, Ahmet Pasic. "Your honours, after being there that night, there is no doubt in my mind they were all killed," he said.
Over 100,000 people were killed in the 1992-95 Bosnian war. Prosecutors will seek to show that Mladic, who was on the run from international justice until his capture in Serbia last May, was firmly in command of the Serb forces who carried out the worst of the ethnic cleansing, culminating in the murder of up to 8,000 men and boys from Srebrenica in 1995.
The wounds of the war are far from healed. Hundreds of people lined the main street of the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo on Monday to watch trucks carrying the bodies of 520 newly identified victims of the massacre pass through on their way to Srebrenica.
In a speech on international justice in The Hague, delivered at the time Pasic was giving evidence, William Hague urged the international community not to allow the success of the war crimes tribunal there to bring Balkan war criminals to justice, to be squandered by a lack of political will over Syria.
"We must show political will and commitment in the areas I have described, and demonstrate greater international resolve to prevent conflict, starting in Syria today," the foreign secretary said.
"It is a sad truth that the biggest advances in international justice came about because of our revulsion at atrocities: the horror of the World Wars, the killing fields of Cambodia, the premeditated barbarity in Bosnia and Kosovo, the slaughter in Rwanda, and the mass rapes in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Today, how much better it would be to look ahead and summon the political will to act to prevent conflict and expand human rights without needing to be shamed into doing so by the deaths and suffering of innocent people."
