The diplomatic effort to find a solution to the Iranian nuclear crisis has hit a brick wall in Moscow, and appears to be seriously undermined. An experts meeting has been arranged to pore over the duelling sides' papers, ostensibly to see if there is any technical ambiguities or common ground the negotiators in Moscow missed, but it is far from clear where close scrutiny of details will help bridge a wide rift between the sides.
The absence of progress meant that a resumption of talks elsewhere appeared pointless, but the pressure to maintain some sort of contact was immense. The Russian hosts were insistent the process should not die in Moscow on the Kremlin's watch. More importantly, the official declaration that diplomacy had reached a dead-end risked opening the door to Israeli military intervention.
The agreement for experts to meet on 3 July is a fudge that has the virtue of leaving the door open to a resumption of full negotiations, which began amid cautious optimism in Istanbul in April. Western diplomats hope that the imposition of an EU oil embargo, due to take effect on 1 July, two days before the technicians meet in Istanbul, as well as more US financial sanctions will eventually change minds in Tehran, and force concessions.
At present, the chances of that seem remote. The Iranians were defiant in Moscow and apparently not in the mood for concessions or bargaining. They placed maximalist demands on the table and offered little in return – only hinting they might halt production of 20% uranium, a critical proliferation issue, without explicitly putting it on the table.
Western diplomats insist that an experts meeting will remove ambiguities from the two positions, but there seems little ambiguity about the gulf between them. However, there is little choice but to try to keep contacts going and the door to serious talks ajar. However costly, frustrating and absurd the diplomatic process often seems, the prospect of a new war in the Middle East is far, far worse.
