Britain's diplomatic relations with In 2009, Correa closed a US military base, renounced Ecuador's national debt and joined the Bolivarian Alternative for the Ecuador has also given diplomatic support to Iran in its standoff with the west over its nuclear programme. Correa visited Tehran in 2008 and announced the opening of embassies in each other's countries, while building up defence cooperation with Iran. Iran has also provided loans for the construction of hydroelectric power plants. In 2010, the US government declared Ecuador as being in violation of international regulations on money-laundering and financing terrorism, further worsening ties with Washington.
However, the shift in foreign policy has not had until now a direct impact on British relations. The Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall visited Ecuador in March 2009 as part of a regional tour to focus attention on climate change and celebrate the 200th anniversary of the birth of Charles Darwin. The couple visited the Galapagos islands and met the vice president, Lenin Moreno, and were greeted by a crowd of about 1,000 waving British flags in a central square.
Correa visited London in 2009 and gave a lecture at the London School of Economics on his "citizens revolution" in Ecuador, speaking mostly in English.
According to Ecuabrit, a British-based website aimed at promoting good bilateral relations, the UK provided nearly a fifth of the £47m EU aid spent in the country from 2007 to 2010. The foreign office last night said it had no comment on the impact of Julian Assange's actions on relations with Quito.
According to the foreign office website, over 24,000 Britons visited Ecuador last year. The official travel advice warned visitors about political unrest, saying: "British nationals should exercise caution, avoid gatherings and carry ID at all times. Even peaceful demonstrations can turn violent. Large crowds should be avoided. Foreigners participating in political demonstrations or protests of any kind may be subject to arrest and deportation under Ecuadorean law."
