The coming two days of talks in Moscow on Iran's nuclear programme are not quite the last chance for a diplomatic solution to the gathering crisis, but they are getting uncomfortably close. The absence of tangible progress in the next 48 hours will rob diplomacy of much of its remaining credibility and substantially increase the chance of a devastating conflict.
This is the third round of talks between Iran and a group of six world powers, and arguably the most critical. The benchmark for success at the two prior rounds was set extremely low. In Istanbul in April, the talks were deemed a success because the Iranian delegation showed up and said it was prepared in principle to talk about the nuclear programme.

Round two in Baghdad in May made no real progress but was said not to have failed because the Iranian negotiator, Saeed Jalili, said words to the effect that Tehran was prepared to discuss its current enrichment of U-235, uranium's most fissile isotope, at a 20% level of purity. This is the greatest proliferation concern as it would be relatively easy to turn it into weapons-grade, 90%-enriched uranium, should Iran decide to make a bomb.
In Baghdad, Jalili did not put forward a concrete proposal setting out what Iran would require to stop 20% enrichment, and ignored an offer put forward by the six-nation group and presented by Catherine Ashton, the EU foreign policy chief, of 20%-enriched fuel plates for a medical research reactor in Tehran, advice and equipment for nuclear safety and spare parts for Iran's commercial airliners, if "Jalili did not even give the proposal a passing glance when it was handed over," said a participant at the Baghdad talks. Worse still, in the weeks that followed the Iranian delegation even denied having even seen the offer from the six nations (the US, UK, France, Germany, China and Russia).
On this tenuous thread the parties have agreed to meet for a third time in Moscow, but western diplomats arrive insisting that there can be no repeat of Baghdad, where Jalili showed readiness to orate but not to bargain, and that they are not interested in continuing "talks for the sake of talks". Their hope is that Jalili will come to Moscow with a counter-proposal that could be the starting point for a deal. After issuing veiled threats not to come to Western officials say are not prepared to give away something irreversible, recognition of Iran's right to enrich, in return for something that was all too reversible, like turning down the dials on Iran's uranium enrichment centrifuges, say from 20% to 3.5% (the level needed for nuclear power stations) . For the security council to abandon its position on enrichment, they argue, Iran would have to provide cast-iron guarantees of transparency, accepting intrusive inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and giving a full account of any past experimentation with weapons design.
Seyed Hossein Mousavian, a former Iranian diplomat who has just produced a memoir of his days at the negotiating table, argues that Tehran would make such a bargain, although some Iran watchers argued that since Mousavian's time – he was last directly involvedin 2005 – the regime of the supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, has become more embattled, more dysfunctional and much less able to effect a strategic change of course.
Another possibility in Moscow is that Iran can be induced to accept the confidence-building deal it has been offered involving cessation of 20% enrichment if the offer is sweetened with some form of sanctions relief, such as postponement of an EU oil embargo, due from 1 July.
However, there are no guarantees that Iran would accept such an enhanced deal, and there is considerable reluctance in the west to offer it. From the western perspective it would represent a reward for Iran's opacity at the talks, and a disproportionate exchange for suspension of 20%-enriched uranium production. Iran has already accumulated enough to keep its medical research reactor going for at least five years, and top Iranian officials have hinted that the country has no immediate need to make more.

However, Iranian hawks have come up with a new use for uranium enriched to higher levels. Last week the navy announced plans to build a nuclear powered submarine – an incredibly difficult endeavour involving the construction of a submarine around a mini nuclear reactor. Whether Iran is capable of making one or not, the declared goal of building such a submarine (which would not fall under IAEA safeguards), provides a technical rationale for enriching uranium to 20% or more.
Tactically the nuclear submarine announcement has many advantages for Iran at the negotiating table. But if it contributes to the final breakdown of a diplomatic process that is already fast running out steam, it could represent a huge strategic miscalculation. No one knows whether the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu's ever-present threat to take military action against Iran's nuclear facilities is a bluff, but if the negotiations collapse in Moscow, an Israeli attack will be more likely than if the talks had never begun.
