After a week of acerbic fencing between Tehran and Brussels, tempers appear to have been assuaged for the time being by an hour-long Monday night phone call between the EU foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton and the chief Iranian negotiator, Saeed Jalili.
In the course of that conversation Jalili dropped his insistence on a technical meeting before Moscow, which Ashton's office had opposed on the grounds that there had been countless meetings and conversations about the shape of the table and very little on what was going to be put on the table. 
Ashton's office issued a statement saying that Jalili had "agreed on the need for Iran to engage" on the proposals put forward last month in Baghdad by the six-nation group of negotiators (known in Brussels as the E3+3) for whom Ashton acts as coordinator. That is a step forward from last week when Jalili's deputy, Ali Bagheri, denied having seen those proposals. Jalili now at least acknowledges their existence, according to European diplomats.
The Ashton statement 'also conveyed the E3+3's readiness to respond to the issues raised by the Iranians in Baghdad.' The Iranian media presented this as a reluctance western readiness to discuss Iran's five-point proposal. But it is not clear what those five points are. Jalili did not enumerate then in Baghdad. It was only when Iranian news reports claimed such a proposal had been made that the E3+3 diplomats and Ashton's officials hastily parsed the Iranian's remarks to try to separate out five distinct ideas. 
Some of what Jalili had to say had nothing to do with the nuclear issue. He presented a position paper on Syria and Bahrain for example. The only concrete demand he made was for the world to recognise Iran's right to enrich uranium, but as far as the E3+3 are concerned, that would be an end-point of negotiations and would depend on One of the more hopeful signs of the day was a quote attributed to Jalili on Press TV saying that he would clarify his five points in Moscow. For example, Jalili did not mention sanctions relief at the Baghdad talks. If he puts them on the table in Russia, the ball would be in the other court, and meaningful negotiations could get going. 
Trita Parsi and Reza Marashi argue in a Huffington Post today that Europe should postpone its oil embargo, due to take effect on July 1, by six months, in return for a freeze on the production of 20%-enriched uranium. That would give all parties breathing space until after the November US presidential elections. If Barack Obama is reelected, he would have a freer hand to do deals. 
European governments are however nervous about offering more and more concessions as a response to Iranian inscrutability. They want Iran to put a clear proposal on the table and then bargain. Jalili may make a step towards clarity on Wednesday in a report to Iran's parliament, the Majlis, although it's not a forum famous for plain speaking. At the same time, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, will be in Tehran to put more pressure on the theocratic government to frame a coherent proposal bargaining position.
Jalili is in an unenviable position. His marching orders come in the form of ambiguous and somewhat ethereal pronouncements from the Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei, and his job is to try to interpret those utterances at the bargaining table, well aware that he will be pilloried back in Tehran if he gets it wrong. It is not surprising he is nervous about making concrete statements, and reprimanded his deputy, Ali Bagheri, when he appeared to stray into specifics in Baghdad. Until now, Jalili has taken refuge from his dilemma in opaque declaratory rhetoric. In Moscow, he will have to be coaxed out of that blurry haven.The political directors of the six powers have been huddling in Strasbourg this week rehearsing tactics. There had been reports from Washington that the Obama administration might try an ambitious new gambit of 'going big', taking a short cut to a comprehensive settlement and abandoning the step-by-step strategy followed until now. There seems to have been little sign of that in Strasbourg. One European diplomat said the Americans had told him they had simply been rehearsing scenarios in case the Iranians arrive in Moscow and suddenly put everything on the table. 
If there was an attempt to fast-track to a comprehensive settlement, it would presumably involve Iran accepting a more intrusive regime of IAEA inspections, known as the Additional Protocol, and cooperating fully with the IAEA's investigation of evidence that Iran had a weapons programme in the past. (Talks on that investigation broke down on the weekend). Once international confidence was deemed to be restored, the UN security council would reverse its demand for Iran to stop enriching uranium at all and endorse low level enrichment, suitable for fuel for modern nuclear power stations. 
Taking such big steps, however, involves mutual trust, which is why the negotiations this year have focused on small reciprocal confidence-building measures. Judging by the acrimony of the past few days, this approach has ceased to be very productive, despite some early hopeful signs. What we have instead on the road to Moscow is a messy game of chicken with each side daring the other to bring the talks to a halt and thereby risk Israeli military action. It is not a recipe for success.
