The reports which emerged hour by hour from the negotiating chamber in Baghdad last week spoke of proposals offered and spurned, then of counter-proposals and an improving ambience. In retrospect such reports more a reflection of the journalistic imperative to keep a conventional narrative going than actual developments inside the room.
Conversations with the participants since the two dusty days in Baghdad make it clear that they spent much of the time scratching their heads trying to understand what was being said. This was no reflection on the quality of the interpreting, but rather a symptom of a cultural divide. The Iranian delegation led by Saeed Jalili did not represent the Iran of the bazaar, but the It was as if the major powers had come to Baghdad to sell a car only to be received with a mediation on the virtues of driving. The results sometimes bordered on farce with the diplomats and Iran experts from the US, UK, France, Germany, The Iranian media reported during the talks that Jalili had demanded relief from impending oil sanctions, but he had not mentioned them in his opening remarks, nor in the later discussion. The international negotiators also heard from news reports that Jalili had presented a five-point proposal, in response to the package they had offered at the opening of the talks. However, on reviewing his actual words (there was no written proposal) it was hard to discern what all those points were. Some delegations counted three, others four and only a few claimed to have identified all five.
It seemed clear that Jalili's first point was that the fatwa of the Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei, declaring nuclear weapons forbidden under Islam would be 'operationalised', but he did elaborate how that would be done. The second point was that Iran's right to enrich uranium under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) had to be recognised by the major powers. The third involved a discussion of regional issues including Syria and Bahrain.
Some participants believed a fourth point was a hint that Tehran should be compensated in some way for making a agreement with the IAEA on future inspections. The IAEA director-general, Yukiya Amano, returned from a visit to Tehran last Monday saying he and Jalili had decided to reach agreement, triggering a flurry of mistaken reports that an agreement had indeed been reached. What appears to have happened instead is that Jalili left the IAEA issue unresolved so as to take it to Baghdad as a bargaining chip.
A few diplomats at the Baghdad talks identified Jalili's signal that Iran was ready to discuss its enrichment of uranium up to 20% purity, a cause of particular alarm in the West and in Israel, as a fifth point, although it only emerged in the course of discussion rather than in the Iranian negotiator's presentation. Jalili did not make clear whether Iran was willing to suspend 20%, and what it would demand in return if it did, but the head of the Iranian nuclear programme, Fereydoun Abbasi-Davani has since said that Iran had no need to suspend 20% enrichment. 
After a brief flowering of optimism in the run-up to Baghdad, there is widespread anxiety over whether the diplomatic process can survive Moscow without more concrete achievements. None of the delegations from the EU or the six-nation negotiating group is willing to set a benchmark for Moscow, for fear of offering a hostage to fortune at a time when Israel is threateningly unilateral military action. But western diplomats are similarly agreed that there was to be some qualitative progress in Moscow on June 18 to justify keeping the talks going - if not a deal, at least the elements of a deal. Yet the US and the western European states are adamant that there would be no concessions on sanctions or Iran's right to enrich without a dramatic reciprocal concessions from Tehran. Now the plentiful dust of Baghdad has settled, it is hard to see where that progress might come from.
