The huge dust storm that cut off Iraqi airspace has died down this afternoon, clearing the air for the arrival of the multiple delegations converging on Baghdad for tomorrow's nuclear talks with the Iranian government. Whether this is a good metaphor for the real issues on the table is open to question.
The mood music coming out of Brussels and Tehran has been upbeat ahead of the talks and the prospect has been raised of the outline of a confidence-building deal emerging from Baghdad, in which Since I blogged on such a deal last week, I have got some push-back from officials involved in the Baghdad talks. Some in the six-nation group (known as the P5+1 or E3+3 depending on your geographical and arithmetical preferences) conducting the talks are against giving any sanctions relief in return for what is described as an "easy give" from Tehran. The centrifuges at Natanz and Fordow have already produced enough 20%-enriched uranium to make medical isotopes at the TRR for up to 10 years. they point out.
Britain is pushing for a ban on insurance for tankers carrying Iranian oil to be pushed back six months because of what it says are administrative difficulties in implementing it, but any change to EU sanctions requires unanimous backing, and the British proposal is still under EU review. Winning consensus to push back the July 1 start-date for the embargo on Iranian oil purchases will be even harder. 
It is already having an impact as the sanctions require Iranian oil shipments to have been unloaded by the July start-date. US sanctions meanwhile are in the hands of Congress and therefore almost impossible to reverse in the forseeable future.
Yet suspending sanctions are items one, two and three on the Iranian wish-list. As things stand, most observers think it unlikely the Iranians would give up 20%-enrichment without some kind of relief. Even if that proves true, however, it need not stop the Baghdad talks being counted as a success by the very low standards set by the participants, who all have a strong interest in keeping the talks in play and preventing an Israeli military strike. 
The minimal benchmark for Baghdad is for the Iranian representative, Saeed Jalili, to put Tehran's wish-list on the table while acknowledging the wish-list laid down by the six-nation group, fronted by the EU high representative for foreign policy, Catherine Ashton. Both sides could then take these bargaining chips back to their capitals to study pending a follow-up meeting (in Geneva perhaps) in two weeks' to a month's time.
As in last month's round ot talks in Istanbul, the bar has been set so close to the ground that all parties should be able to trip across it.
The IAEA's Yukiya Amano has been trying to do his best to boost the good vibes at Baghdad with a trip to Tehran over the weekend in a bid to agree a framework for agency investigations into suspected Iranian nuclear weapons projects. The bid fell short but Amano came up with a form of words that accentuates the positive. He said he and Jalili had decided they would sign an agreement "quite soon", while not actually finalising the deal. Here is the official IAEA transcript of Amano's remarks.
It is unclear to what extent this is indeed just a matter of a few trivial corrections to a 99% agreed contract or a face-saving formula for falling short. Amano said twice that Jalili had promised him the remaining differences would "not be an obstacle to agreement" and that all would be clear "in a few days". 
On the plus side, some European officials had worried that Jalili would arrive in Baghdad and present an IAEA inspection deal as Iran's sole concession. That now looks less of a danger.
