It would be hard to conjure up a more challenging moral, political and diplomatic problem for the Obama administration than the one Chinese activist It fleetingly appeared that disaster had been avoided on Wednesday, just in time for Hillary Clinton to arrive with a large high-powered US delegation for long-scheduled bilateral talks with the Beijing regime. Both the US and China could claim to have saved face as Chen left the embassy, apparently of his own accord, and headed to a Beijing hospital for treatment care of his broken leg and to be reunited with his wife and children. Under the supposed deal, In fact, things fell apart in minutes. Chen said that his wife had been threatened with assault if he did not leave the embassy, by those in Shandong province who had kept him captive for reporting on forced abortions.
From his bedside, Chen is now saying he wants to leave China on Clinton's plane, putting the US secretary of state, right, in the full glare of a spotlight she had sought to avoid. She launched Thursday's talks with remarks that touched on human rights, but did not mention Chen by name. That evasion may not be tenable for too long. To shrug off Chen's plea for a seat on her official plane will cast her, and her boss in the Oval Office, as cold-hearted villains, sacrificing an injured blind man for the sake of geopolitics and grimacing handshakes with the Beijing elite.
The debacle has already provided grist for the Republican's ever-hungry mills. The Romney campaign had been trying to score points in Obama's strong suit, cavilling as the president basked in the persistent political glow of last year's assassination of Osama inevitably little mileage in that but the Republican reaction will be all the more ferocious if the administration now fumbles the awkward challenge represented by Chen. That would play into a favourite GOP Republican theme about obsequious Democrats selling out American values abroad.
Flying Chen and his family out of China would go down superbly on the American campaign trail, but it is extremely hard to imagine the Chinese regimeBeijing allowing it. The central unifying theme of its foreign affairs philosophy is non-interference in the internal affairs of nation states, particularly its own rigorously policed one. Despite the fact that Chen was illegally detained by provincial officials for revealing their unlawful activities, China is blithely demanding an apology from the US for the fact that the injured Chen chose an American embassy as a temporary haven. The Communist party leadership is preparing for its own succession process and it is not about to lose face to the Americans. On the other hand, Chen's predicament presents an open challenge for Wen Jiabao's calls for reform and the rule of law.
Both governments in this affair are playing for high stakes, but not as high as the personal stakes for Chen and the many brave Chinese activists supporting him. It is not beyond the realms of the possible for both Washington and China to find an honourable way out of the crisis that preserves the bilateral relationship, political reputations and Chen's rights. But it is also not hard to imagine Beijing pursuing a strategy that would be damaging politically for the leadership in both capitals and would sacrifice Chen and his family to retribution in Shandong. If ever there was a time for diplomats on both sides to demonstrate their worth, it is now.
