The continuing Nato occupation of Afghanistan – under the shadow of the alleged murder of 16 Afghan civilians by a lone US soldier Sunday – will surely be near the top of Barack Obama and David Cameron's agenda during the British prime minister's official visit to the US. The Guardian's Julian Borger and Reuters' David Rohde took readers' questions as the US and UK leaders met to discuss an effective exit strategy and post-occupation political settlement in Discussion transcript. 
We'll start with this question: At a joint press conference on Wednesday, it was asserted by a British journalist that when it comes to Afghanistan, Obama and Cameron "talk a good game" but the American and British people "don't buy it," thinking that the situation in Afghanistan is "a mess." Is the same sentiment felt in Afghanistan?


What value do you really think that polls have in Afghanistan, given the considerable amount of criticism that they've been subjected to by social scientists (and those who live in Afghanistan)? 


After 2014 which countries in the region do you anticipate filling the vacuum. Many fail to recognize China's investment in Afghanistan; do you think the Chinese will take a role in security?


Do you think a return to that civil war and brutality that Julian says many Afghans fear is likely following withdrawal of troops? 


What can they do now that the situation is so bad in Afghanistan? 


Pakistan must be involved. Pakistan plays a key role in all of this. A strong diplomatic effort cannot occur without all players. It will have to be done incrementally even if it means talking to each party separately at first. 


David, while we wait for Sadie I wanted to ask a follow-up. You wrote me in an email, that "there was a real sense of hope in 2001. It's tragic what has happened." Can you say more about what it was like in the earlier years? 


Would a surge, perhaps with greater regional involvement, of the style of Iraq, not help stabilize the country pre-withdrawal? 


The Taliban have been the biggest roadblock in the physical rebuilding of the country - what would it take to bring them into the fold so to speak; what do they want? 


What are the likely factions in a potential civil war? The Taliban, the national government, you mentioned the old Northern Alliance...are there any other significant groups? And do you have any idea of the relative balance of powers between them? 


It seems that the 'international community' is not failing at all, it's just that their goals are only sold as 'humanitarian' and just, a more accurate description of the goal seems to be a global military positioning for further wars and control of central asian resources to stem chinese and russian power. 


As the Taliban assert more control over the government, what can be done to protect women and girls? It appears even if Karzai stays in power he is not willing to ensure the meager progress made is sustained. 


Every journalist I speak with who has been to Afghanistan talks about the story "everyone knows" but holds back on reporting for reasons of personal safety: Official corruption, especially as it relates to the drug trade. What is the current state of affairs and what is its impact on relations between Afghanistan and the world? 


lets face it, the Taliban won, 10 years wasted, thousands of lives wasted, current Afghan regime will be kicked out the day they loose the support form the US and UK or stop paying their militia decent wages.


Is there really a chance for a settlement that will bring the Taliban on board with the regime on a political process, now or later? 


here to go to the desktop version of the site.
