In an interview with the Guardian, Khar said even after a visit by the Afghan president, "We are waiting for him to determine the course of action of his government and once that is done, we will want to be seen to be fully supporting it… The messages from Kabul are a bit confusing. At first they say they are supporting it but they say they are recalling their ambassador because they think they have not been taken into confidence," Khar said.
"For us, the dangers of being supportive of something where there is not enough clarity on whether the Afghan government is fully behind it, fully owns it, fully drives it, are too high. The stakes are far too high."
She added: "What we expect of Khar insisted that Pakistan would not actively hinder the effort to hold talks in Qatar, and denied reports that Islamabad had blocked some Taliban officials from flying to Doha to participate. However, in a reminder of the fragility of the Afghan-Pakistani relationship, the foreign minister again rejected Afghan pressure to allow Kabul officials have access to Taliban figures they believe to be in Pakistan, repeating longstanding Pakistani denials that Islamabad has any idea of the whereabouts of the "I am not an authority on where Mullah Omar is, but I do know that Pakistani authorities do not know where Mullah Omar is. I know that much," she said, adding: "Pakistan's view is that everything the Afghans ask us which is doable, which is realistic, which is based on facts, we will do… but it has to be based on facts."
However, Khar would not say whether Afghan officials would be allowed to meet one of Omar's deputies, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who is in Pakistani custody. During his visit to Islamabad on Friday, Karzai expressed frustration with Pakistani policy, saying "impediments" in the relationship should be removed "sooner rather than later".
Pakistan's ambivalence over the effort to open a dialogue in Khar denied that her government was delegating a politically tricky issue, arguing that the parliamentary review of US policy was "something to be proud about" and would improve bilateral relations in the long term.
"I think this relationship has been missing a great deal of credibility and a lot of that is because the relationship has always peaked during dictatorships and because a lot of the terms of the relationship are not very transparent," she said. "What this government is doing is trying to get some of that credibility back… Once you are able to do that I think we will turn out to be much more effective partnership."
By way of contrast, the minister praised Pakistan's relations with the UK, which she said worked well because they were "predictable", adding that Britain had been understanding over Islamabad's opposition to US drone strikes inside Pakistani territory.
At a joint press conference with Khar on Tuesday, William Hague described the British relationship with Pakistan as "deep, long term and strategic."
The foreign secretary said Afghan-led efforts towards reconciliation and a lasting peace settlement in Afghanistan were "vital to the long term security of Britain and Pakistan and to the region".
