A team of UN nuclear inspectors has arrived in Tehran for what analysts describe as make-or-break talks on Iran's nuclear programme, which could either defuse or escalate the looming crisis in the Gulf.
The outcome of the two-day visit by the The IAEA is due to deliver its latest report on Progress in those negotiations would in turn go a long way to defusing growing tensions in the Gulf and could put off the imposition of an EU oil embargo against Iran, currently due to take effect on 1 July.
US financial sanctions aimed at Iranian oil exports will come into operation at about the same time. Iran took pre-emptive action over the weekend, cutting oil sales to Britain and France, although the move was largely symbolic; neither country is reliant on Iranian crude.
If the IAEA delivers a negative report, there would be a move in the agency's board of member states to have Iran referred once more to the UN security council for further punitive measures. It would sour the atmosphere for substantial negotiations with the international community, if not stall them altogether.
"This is a make-or-break situation," said Mark Hibbs, an expert on nuclear proliferation at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. "The Iranians have to understand the language of the IAEA report will be critical to the views of the P5+1 powers and the non-aligned countries. If it says Iran did not co-operate, Iran will be isolated in the boardroom. It will be much more difficult for Russia and China to veto further sanctions."
A report saying Tehran was not being forthcoming on past weapons research would also fuel pressure from hawks in Israel and the US for military action.
The US defence secretary, Leon Panetta, has speculated that Israel might stage air strikes as soon as this spring. However, US defence officials and analysts told the New York Times on Monday that an Israeli attack on Iranian nuclear sites would be dauntingly complex, involving flights of 1,000 miles through hostile airspace – most likely Iraqi.
At least 100 planes would be required and these would have to refuel in the air and avoid Iran's air defences before attacking multiple underground sites at the same time.
Iranian radio reported that the inspectors, led by the IAEA deputy director general, Herman Nackaerts, had asked to talk to Iranian nuclear scientists and to visit a military site at Parchin, which was described in the last IAEA report on Iran in November as a suspected testing ground for nuclear weapons components.
Iran denies it has ever carried out research or development on nuclear weapons and insists its programme is for entirely peaceful purposes.
Western diplomats agree that the readiness of the Tehran authorities to allow the Belgian Nackaerts and his inspectors to visit Parchin and interview scientists such as Mohsen Fakhrizadeh – described in IAEA reports as a central figures in a weapons research programme disbanded in 2003 – will be a critical test of Iran's co-operation.
During Nackaert's initial mission to Tehran last month, Iranian officials did not respond to his requests to visit Parchin, or to his proposal to carry out interviews. Instead, on the night before the IAEA team's departure, they presented their own proposed work plan, which did not address the agency's inquiries.
Under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT), to which Tehran is a signatory, Iran has the right to a peaceful nuclear energy programme, but six UN security council resolutions have demanded it suspend uranium enrichment (which can produce fuel for power reactors and for a bomb) until it can reassure the international community of its peaceful intentions.
Consultations are under way this week among senior diplomats from the P5+1 group over how to respond to an Iranian letter last week offering to resume negotiations that broke down in Istanbul more than a year ago.
Western diplomats say that, since then, Tehran has demanded that all UN sanctions are lifted beforehand and the nuclear programme is off the negotiating table, which is unacceptable to the international community.
It is not clear that last week's letter, from Iran's top nuclear negotiator, Saeed Jalili, to the EU foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton, signified that those preconditions had now been dropped. Ashton's office is likely to be asked to seek clarification on the issue before a new set of negotiations is agreed.
"No one has rejected the letter. Everyone is open to new negotiations, but some of the ambiguities have to be bottomed out before we go forward," said a diplomat from the six-nation group.
If the current IAEA visit fails to win Iranian co-operation, the spotlight will again be on the agency's director-general, Yukiya Amano.
He was criticised by Iran, Russia and China for publishing the November report, in which the IAEA judged intelligence pointing to past Iranian work on making nuclear warheads to be credible.
Hibbs argues that the biggest different between Amano and his predecessor, Mohamed ElBaradei, is that Amano has not sought to overrule the views of his inspectors.
"ElBaradei's approach was conditioned by concern that the Americans, who were then in Iraq, could turn 90 degrees and invade Iran," he said.
"The US now is not in a position to think about war on that scale. Amano, for his part, has a more confined view on what the agency's mandate is. He does not inject himself into the negotiations."
