On Sunday, the New START arms control treaty between US and Russia will have been in force for a year. By this time, according to the conditions laid down by the US Senate for ratifying the treaty, the Obama administration was supposed to have tried to start negotiations with Russia on tactical nuclear weapons, well over a thousand of which are scattered around bases in western Europe, Turkey and Russia on a high state of readiness. 
At a meeting with her Russian counterpart in mid-December, undersecretary of state Ellen Tauscher, ticked this box by bringing up the subject but it was no more than a formality. The vaunted 'reset' with Russia has jammed. The two countries are at odds over missile defence, Syria and the Arab Spring, and the animosity is likely to grow once Vladimir Putin returns to the presidency. Negotiations on a new arms control treaty to agree really significant cuts in nuclear arms look further away than ever, and the high hopes inspired by Obama's famous Prague speech of April 2009 are in danger of looking simply naive.
At present, Russia is thought to have well over 1,000 tactical weapons over various sorts along its western border, including the enclave of Kaliningrad according to some reports. The US has about 180 B61 nuclear gravity bombs stored at bases in Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, Italy and Turkey. These Cold War relics are generally agreed to serve no military purpose, and there were hopes that the In an attempt to restore some momentum to arms control, an international pro-disarmament movement called Global Zero is launching a new proposal today at the Munich Security Conference, for both the US and Russia to remove their tactical nuclear weapons from combat bases in Europe and put them in storage. In the case of the American B61's this would mean shipping them back to the US. Russia would withdraw its tactical weapons to its own storage facilities, known as 'S' sites.
Global Zero's Bruce Blair argues that a deal on tactical weapons would unblock progress on arms control and clear the way for reductions from New START's limits of 1550 strategic warheads (with tactical weapons completely unregulated) to a new ceiling of 1,000 total. 
Malcolm Rifkind, a former UK defence secretary and member of Global Zero's international commission of former and serving security officials, argues that breaking the arms control impasse was the central aim of the initiative. He said: "It is the prospect of the momentum towards further major reductions in nuclear weapons grinding to a halt that is the key concern."
As a side effect, the Global Zero initiative would also reduce the threat of theft of a nuclear warhead by moving the tactical weapons out of a large number of combat bases with dubious security  and move them to a smaller number of hopefully well-guarded storage sites. Blair points out that as the fissile pits of Russian warheads have to be renewed every 10 years "on any given day there are hundreds of Russian nuclear weapons in some stage of transit".
Given that most experts believe these weapons are useless (see this explanation of their futility by Edmond Seay, a former advisor to the US ambassador to Nato) this initiative ought to be pushing at an open door, but there is a lot of politics conspiring to keep that door shut.
Russia does not want to start talking about nuclear weapons until forward-deployed US B61's are taken out of Europe, and a deal is done on missile defence. That position is likely to be entrenched as Putin returns to untrammelled power. Consequently, advocates like Daryl Kimball of the Arms Control Association, believe the only way to make any progress is to call Moscow's bluff and unilaterally withdraw the B61's. Kimball told me:
These weapons have absolutely no military value. Remove them and you remove the excuse for Unilateral steps towards disarmament might be considered a political risk for Obama as he faces reelection but Kimball reckons that if Nato gives him political cover by agreeing on the B61's removal in its ongoing Deterrence and Defence Posture Review (DDPR), due to be completed in time for the NATO Chicago summit in May, "then the Republican candidates will have a tough time explaining why that is a problem". 
However, several US allies in Europe, particularly the Baltic states, are nervous about removing the weapons because of the symbolic sense of security they provide. Arms control advocates argue that American 'boots on the ground' in the form of bases or joint exercises would be far more meaningful and considerably cheaper. Ultimately, Global Zero's Blair hopes that the global economic squeeze and sheer fiscal desperation will break the deadlock. That point of view resonate in Washington and Moscow, which tend to be deaf to what is arguably the most powerful case for ridding Europe of these obsolete but devastating weapons: that failure to do so makes it much harder to convince countries outside the nuclear club not to seek similar weapons of their own.
