Robert Kelley, a former director at the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) claims in a Bloomberg article that a two-page document, first printed by the Times and used by the agency its November assessment of Iran's weapons work, is of dubious authenticity. 
This is of vital importance, Kelley points out, because the document was one of only three pieces of evidence in the IAEA report that Iran's weapons design work continued after 2004. This is the nub of his argument: 
In 2009, the IAEA received a two-page document, purporting to come from In converation, Kelley adds that the new team under the new director general, Yukiya Amano, also, in effect, fished the discarded document out of the trash heap. He says the source of the document was the Israeli government,Kelley stresses he still thinks Iran has a lot to explain:
I should be clear: Iran deserves tough scrutiny. It claims to have given up its nuclear-weapons ambitions, yet repeatedly acts as if it has something to hide. I am a skeptic; I suspect the Iranians may have an ongoing weaponization program. And the uncertainty must be resolved. 

However, his experience running the inspections in Iraq has taught him that experts who have doubts should speak out loudly before anyone goes to war.
The Guardian's Saeed Kamali Dehghan has taken a look at the Farsi version of document and disagrees with Kelley's source on the issue of language. He sees no evidence it was written by a non-Farsi speaker.
David Albright, of the Institute for Science and Interational Security (ISIS), who analysed the documents for The Times in December 2009, said that it was clear that it had been retyped. But he added that he consulted other governments and the IAEA, who had seen other versions of the document and took it seriously. 
In particular, the safeguards department at the IAEA, which had had the document in its possession for a few years, treated it seriously, which sets it apart from the forged documents on Iraqi WMD which Kelley refers to. The IAEA safeguards department (the inspectors) saw almost immediately that the Iraqi docs were bogus, but it and the IAEA director general at the time, Mohamed ElBaradei, were not listened to. As for the Iranian document, Albright says that "Ultimately, we can't tell if it is a forgery." That also appeared to have been the conclusion drawn by the CIA.
