A split between the US and its European allies has emerged over the role of rural Afghan paramilitary units, seen by American commanders as critical to the military exit strategy.
A year after the Afghan local police (ALP) was launched, the General John Allen, the American commander of the Nato-led International Security Assistance Force (Isaf) sees the ALP as the key to success in Helmand, from where some 14,000 US marines are departing in the next few months, leaving a 9,000-strong British garrison and some Georgian and Danish troops to manage until Afghan regular soldiers and police can be deployed.
British officials, however, have voiced anxiety over the strategy, particularly over the capabilities of the ALP, described by Allen's predecessor, General David Petraeus, as "a community watch with AK-47s". In northern An Isaf inquiry last month into allegations of abuse by ALP units recommended that vetting be improved "to focus on hostile groups or negative actors who might inhibit ALP performance". Human rights organisations argue the problems are systemic and oppose the planned expansion of the scheme.
The issue is becoming central as the withdrawal and the transition to Afghan-run security in 2014 approaches. One senior western diplomat said: "Whether you are optimistic or pessimistic about Afghanistan really depends on what you think of the ALP." ALP units are set up in communities where the local council, or shura, has requested them. They are screened by shura members and given a criminal check, and 40 hours' training. They wear brown uniforms to distinguish them from the grey of the regular police, earn 60% of regular police pay, and do not have the power of arrest. They are organised in 150-strong units, each mentored by about a dozen US Green Berets or sometimes British Royal Marines.
Speaking in a recent interview in Afghanistan, General Allen argued the ALP would play an important role in Helmand. "The Afghan local police has become an important component," the Isaf commander said. "It's all about community mobilisation. The ALP will hold the ground, providing stability, which permits us to use both Isaf and ANSF [Afghan national security forces] elsewhere."
British commanders, however, have voiced their concern at troops being spread too thinly as the number of US marines in Helmand are expected to be reduced from a total of 20,000 to an anticipated 6,000 by the end of next summer. UK officials have told their American counterparts that British troops will not "backfill" areas vacated by the marines, and have expressed concerns over the ability of a home guard with only 40 hours' training to keep the Taliban from taking back villages and towns from which the insurgents were driven out in the past two years.
UK officials acknowledge the ALP has contributed to the fall in violence across Helmand in the past year, but worry that the community defence forces cannot defend hard-won territory. Faced with the prospect of dwindling budgets for Afghanistan, US commanders see the ALP as an affordable, long-term security fix. The head of US special operations, Admiral William McRaven, this month backed the extension of the ALP programme beyond 2015. A British Foreign Office spokeswoman said: "The ANSF is the long-term solution to security provision in Afghanistan. However, we recognise that local initiatives may in the short term help meet community security needs, until adequate numbers of ANSF are trained."
German officers who lead Isaf say the ALP in their zone are indistinguishable from the warlord-led groups preying on the population. A German official said: "We're not happy about the ALP. It is a half-public, half not-so-public institution and its not easy to control. The problem we find is there are too many actors in the security arenas, and they all have their own agenda."
German military officials say that although ALP units are formally under the control by the Afghan interior ministry (under a deal to overcome President Hamid Karzai's objections to their creation), their actual paymasters, at least in the north, are US special forces. The Germans have told their US counterparts they worry that as soon as the Americans leave their region, ALP units will defect to whomever pays them to fight: warlords, the Taliban or drugs traffickers.
Last month, Karzai closed down another US-back irregular force operating in the north, called the Critical Infrastructure Police, whose record of extorting money from the local population was also a cause of anxiety for the Human Rights Watch has urged the Obama administration not to proceed with the tripling of the ALP announced by Admiral McRaven, pointing to its record of abuses.
"The ALP has come to be a key rationale for the US drawdown, because they can't do the training and equipping of the ANSF in time," Brad Adams, the group's Asia director, said.
"They are throwing people with very little training into securing an area that has seen some of the most fierce fighting in Afghanistan," Adams added, expressing concerned that the ALP is mutating from its originally intended form.
"The ALP is supposed to not supposed to have heavy weapons. If they now expect them to occupy space militarily to protect civilians from insurgents, they do not seem to be the right force. But if they are going to be that force, maybe they're going to be just another militia."
