a guest blog yesterday, the former IAEA deputy director general for safeguards, Olli Heinonen, argued that the nuclear rod which Iran claims to have made and tested is designed for use at the heavy water plant in Arak. Today, another former IAEA director, Robert Kelley, puts forward an alternative view:
The first point is that Iran claimed to have produced its first fuel rod several years ago. They provided pictures and video of the president examining the rods. So the first question is whether which or either story is even true.
If they made a natural uranium plate, as opposed to a 19.75% enriched plate it is probably to test mechanical and chemical processes making the plate. At natural enrichment the plate will barely fission at all, but it will suffer some of the stresses and fission gas production associated with later 19.75% plates and be a much safer initial test.
They claim the plate was exposed for 1500 MWh which is about 300 reactor operating hours and they say it took about a month so operating about 12 hours a day would be close.
Manufacturing the MTR (material test reactor) fuel "sandwich" is difficult, especially making the seal all around the edge of the plate so a natural plate is a good safe place to start. Most use an aluminum-uranium alloy for fuel and not uranium oxide but there are several fuel forms in use now. 
It would also be hard for Iran to make the precision zirconium tubes for rods until their zirconium plant is fully functional and I think it is not.
Regarding Arak, it is a BIG problem on the horizon. You note from the ISIS article above we doubt that Iran made the fuel they showed to the president and we doubt that fuel will fit in Arak or work properly to make medical isotopes. So Olli is right to point out that when Arak fuel is produced and tested it will signal a new phase in the Iranian program – production of plutonium. But they will not use the RBMK (a graphite-moderated reactor) element that they probably bought from Russia and showed the president; they will use domestic natural uranium metal slugs for rapid plutonium extraction.
