The Obama administration says it has not taken a decision to release high-ranking Taliban officials in its custody in return for the Taliban's agreement to open a political office in Qatar for negotiations, as we reported in Wednesday's Guardian. 
Tommy Vietor, the National Security Council spokesman said in a statement: 
This report is not accurate. The United States has not decided to release any The prisoners named in the report have indeed come up in a series of US meetings with the Taliban in Germany and in the Gulf over the past year, and a senior administration official pointed out that:
The Afghan government and individuals associated with the Taliban have requested the US government release to However, the same official made it clear there are a lot of legal hoops to jump through before anyone gets out of Guantanamo. 
As the Kabul government asked for the transfers in the first place, the latter condition should not be much of a stretch. The same cannot be said of getting the releases through Congress and the NDAA, a defence budget bill reluctantly signed into law by Obama on New Year's eve, which has a provision banning further transfers from Guantanamo for at least another year. It even blocks the transfer of the 88 out of 171 men still there who have already been cleared for release. And it codifies indefinite detention without charge. 
It is the latest in a string of reversals for a president who, in one of his first acts on taking office in January 2009, ordered the closure of Guantanamo within a year. The NDAA also ties the administration's hands if there are going to be serious negotiations with the Taliban in their new office in Qatar. Washington and its allies are busy thinking through imaginative solutions, including transferring Taliban figures to house arrest, perhaps in Qatar, while negotiations are underway, but it is clearly going to be an uphill struggle in Congress in an election year. 
Any deal that led to the release of Mullah Fazl Akhund, the former Taliban army chief, or Noorulla Noori, the ex-governor of the northern zone, will also enrage human rights activists who say they should stand trial for atrocities committed in the last two years of Taliban rule. 
The sources for yesterday's story said that the US administration was prepared "in principle" to release Taliban officials from Guantanamo. But it does look like the gap between principle and reality will be hard to bridge. In that case, it is an open question how long the Taliban will stick around in their new Qatar office with nothing to show for it.
