As US-Russian relations continue their long slide, pushed into the deep freeze by the Ukraine conflict, a critical element in that relationship has remained intact.
Four years ago, in much more hopeful times, the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START) entered into force, after having been signed in Prague by Barack Obama and the then Russian president Dmitry Medvedev. The deal involved a cut in both sides’ arsenal of deployed strategic warheads by a third to a new ceiling of 1550 apiece. Afterwards Obama described Medvedev as a “friend and partner” and Medvedev talked of a “personal chemistry” between the two. It was the one solid achievement of the temporary ‘reset’ of relations between Washington and Moscow.
Medvedev has long since left the scene of course, and if there is a personal chemistry between Obama and Vladimir Putin, it is of an extremely toxic variety. Yet the implementation of New START has not been affected. According to the last declared count in September, the US had 1642 warheads, and the Russian Federation had 1643. That is comfortably on a downward glide path to reaching 1550 each as scheduled in three years time.
“It has been a very successful four years, with a continual, smooth and straightforward implementation of the treaty, a significant bright spot in our bilateral relations,” Rose Gottemoeller, the under secretary of state for arms control and international security said in a telephone interview while in London. “It has so far been immune to problems in the relationship.”
However, at the time of its signature, New START was supposed to be the beginning of more ambitious cuts in the arsenals of both states, who own the overwhelming majority of the world’s nuclear weapons between them. But there were no follow-on talks, nor do any seem likely. Obama proposed cutting the strategic deployed arsenals by another third in 2013 but Moscow has not shown interest. “We don’t have a willing dance partner at the moment,” Gottemoeller said.
There is another problem that threatens to upset the stability of the arms control regime between the two countries. Last year, the US accused the Russians of violating the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty by testing a nuclear-capable missile with the banned range of between 500 km and 5,500 km. Gottemoeller said the new weapon was “a new ground-launched cruise missile” but denied it was of a type speculated about in some reports, the Iskander-K or R-500. 
When challenged, Moscow has not acknowledged the existence of the suspect missile and has launched counter-accusations about infringements by the US, which Washington has in turn rejected. The US has threatened to take military counter-measures if the matter is not resolved, hinting that it could station medium-range weapons of its own in Europe once more. But Gottemoeller insisted there was no deadline to trigger such measures and for now, Washington would rely on diplomacy. 
