The US secretary of state, John Kerry, claimed on Thursday that the Iraqi government and its international backers had made significant gains in the battle against At a meeting in London of over 20 countries in a coalition formed last year to fight Islamic State (Isis), Kerry acknowledged the fight against the group – also known as Isil or by its Arabic acronym Daesh – would be “neither short nor easy”, but he insisted the tide was beginning to turn.
“In recent months we have seen, definitively, Daesh’s momentum was halted in He added that several thousand Isis fighters had been killed and “50% of their top commanders have been eliminated”, along with hundreds of military vehicles.
The Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, appealed for continued western arms supplies. He pointed out that the country’s budget depended for 85% of its revenue on oil sales. The plummeting oil price had been “disastrous for us”, he said. “We don’t want to see a military defeat because of budget and fiscal problems.”
Kerry promised that the Iraqi army’s efforts to fight back against the group would not falter for lack of western arms supplies. He said 12 new Iraqi brigades were being trained for the battlefield while a shipment of a large quantity of US M16 rifles would arrive “very, very shortly” to replace the AK-47 assault rifles the army was using.
Meanwhile, he said camps were being opened in Britain’s foreign secretary, Hammond also underlined the importance of efforts to stop Isis recruits travelling through European countries such as Romania and Bulgaria and said he had visited the capitals of both countries, where Britain was working closely with the national security services.
The foreign secretary added: “Turkey is doing a fantastic job of intercepting people who are seeking to get across the border into “The final bit of the jigsaw is to make sure that we have all the powers necessary, both at national level and in European Union law in terms of passenger name record data to make sure that we can intercept these people and keep the country as safe as we can,” Hammond said.
