The UK foreign secretary, Hammond was speaking at the end of an intensive weekend of talks which brought foreign ministers to the Austrian capital in an effort to achieve a breakthrough on the last scheduled day of nine months of negotiations.
Western diplomats said that achieving a comprehensive deal in the last 24 hours was looking increasingly difficult, but added that none of the seven countries represented in Vienna was willing to allow the negotiations to collapse given the progress that had been made and the dire consequences of failure for Middle East stability.
They said the talks could be given extra time, but it was unclear whether the foreign ministers in Vienna would sign a framework agreement, leaving some details to be worked out later, as proof of progress. Another, less ambitious option, would be for them to issue a political statement of intent which resolved few, if any, of the remaining contentious issues, but which envisaged concluding a deal in the future.
Asked about the possibility of an extension to the talks, the British foreign secretary said: “At the moment we’re focused on the last push ... to try and get this across the line. Of course if we’re not able to do it, we’ll then look at where we go from there, but at the moment everybody’s talking about how we are going to try and bridge that gap and move things forward with the Iranians.”
However, Hammond added: “I wouldn’t want to give any false hopes here. We’re still quite a long way apart and there are some very tough and complex issues to deal with but we’re all focused right now on trying to get that deal done.”
The foreign secretary was speaking before a working dinner with the US secretary of state, At the same time, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, held a meeting with the Iranian delegation led by his Iranian opposite number, Mohammad Javad Zarif.
The Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, is due to arrive on Monday morning for a breakfast meeting with Zarif.
In another sign that a critical moment was at hand in the long-running standoff over Iran’s nuclear programme, the Saudi foreign minister, Saud al-Faisal, flew in to Vienna on Sunday and held a meeting with Kerry on his jet at the city’s airport. In order to buy more time for the talks, both the US and Iranian negotiators will have to fend off criticism from conservatives in their home countries, fiercely opposed to the compromises necessary to seal an agreement. A final deal would involve Iranian acceptance of curbs on its nuclear activities in return for a lifting of sanctions. The duration of such an agreement, before “If they have an agreement that is a real document, but they need a limited amount of time to agree details on implementation, then that is a significant breakthrough,” said Trita Parsi, the head of the National Iranian American Council, an advocacy group backing a diplomatic solution to the nuclear stand-off.
“If the agreement is strong enough, it would have to be a document not a verbal statement. Monday is a self-imposed deadline which they can change, but they face a hard deadline when the new [US] Congress comes into power … Congress’s ability to kill the talks if there is no deal is significant. If there is a deal, it will be very costly for Congress to scuttle.”
