Iran’s foreign minister has said that “excessive demands” by the west could torpedo the chances of a deal being reached over the future of the Iranian nuclear programme at negotiations in Vienna.
Speaking to journalists on his arrival at Vienna airport on Tuesday, Mohammad Javad Zarif said that after nine months of increasingly intense negotiations an agreement was still possible, but Tehran would not be to blame if the talks collapsed.
“If, because of excessive demands by the other side we don’t get a result, then the world will understand that the Islamic Republic sought a solution, a compromise and a constructive agreement and that it will not renounce its rights and the greatness of the nation,” Zarif said.
The remarks illustrated the rising tensions as the talks approach a deadline next Monday. Differences have narrowed considerably over the last nine months, but as the number of outstanding issues has shrunk, the differences over them have sharpened.
The remaining issues revolve around the uranium enrichment capacity that Iran would be allowed and how fast sanctions would be lifted in return for Tehran’s acceptance of curbs on its nuclear programme. The Associated Press quoted diplomats as saying the US would accept an enrichment programme with 4,500 centrifuges, but that Iran was prepared to accept a cut from 10,200 to 8,000. At the lower figure, it would take Iran nearly a year to make a nuclear warhead, if it decided to do so. At the higher figure it would theoretically take four or five months.
On sanctions, the west was prepared to offer temporary suspension of some by US presidential waiver and the unblocking of frozen Iranian funds. Tehran wants the immediate lifting of major banking and oil sanctions.
At a meeting in Oman earlier this month, differences over these two crucial points appeared to sharpen after Washington and its five negotiating partners – the UK, France, Germany, Russia and China – presented Tehran with a position paper that offered only limited and temporary sanctions relief in the short term, unless Tehran made deeper cuts in its capacity to enrich uranium.
Zarif was attending the opening meeting in Vienna with the former EU foreign policy chief, Lady Ashton, who chairs the west’s six-nation negotiating group.
The deadline of 24 November was set a year ago, and there is reluctance to go beyond it because both US and Iranian conservative opponents of a deal have gained in strength as the talks have dragged on.
“I can tell you that extension is not and has not been a subject of negotiations at this point,” a senior US official said, adding that it would be “difficult, but possible” to complete a deal by Monday night.
“There are areas where we have made progress, and I’m very glad for that, but there are still areas in which there are very serious gaps that have to be addressed. Whether they can be in this time frame remains to be seen.”
The aim of the negotiations is to reconfigure the Iranian nuclear programme so that the international community can be confident it will not be used to build a warhead in secret, or so quickly that “We hope we get there but we can’t make any predictions,” Kerry told reporters in London. “It is imperative that Iran works with us with all possible effort to prove to the world that the programme is peaceful.”
Ultimately, the senior official said, some of the key decisions would not be taken around the negotiating table in Vienna, but by national leaders in their own countries.
“There are some fundamental decisions that have to get made, and I’m sure they can only be made by the supreme leader and the president of Iran, just as here in the United States decisions have to be taken not only by the secretary of state, but by the president of the United States,” she said, and predicted that those key decisions might not be made until the eleventh hour.
“We are at a very, very difficult point in this negotiation. We all knew that tough decisions – the toughest decisions – would not be taken till the end, and that is likely to be the case, if they can be taken at all.”
