Government plans for a 5p charge on single-use plastic bags, intended to discourage their use, have been sharply criticised by MPs for not going far enough.
The influential environmental audit select committee published its report on the plans on Tuesday, accusing the government of ignoring calls to force all retailers to apply the charge. Ministers have decided to exempt small retailers, arguing that it would be unfair and costly to small businesses such as corner shops.
But the MPs said excluding small retail businesses would render the charge ineffectual, and pointed out that other schemes in Ireland and Wales include corner shops and other small concerns, without harming their businesses.
The 5p charge on bags in England is due to be brought in from October next year.
Joan Walley, who chairs the committee, said: "The 5p bag charge is the right solution: it will reduce litter, cut carbon emissions and reduce waste. [But the exemption for small retailers] risks diluting the benefits of the charge. The decision to include only large retailers is particularly short-sighted and ignores calls from all the main small retailer organisations to be included in the scheme."
The government's exemption for small shops is not supported by the Association of Convenience Stores, the National Federation of Retail Newsagents or the British Retail Consortium. The government says: "Some SME representative bodies are in favour of being included in the charge while others are opposed," although it has not specified which ones.
About 9bn single-use plastic carrier bags are given out free every year in the UK, and despite efforts by retailers – such as selling stouter re-usable bags for a small fee and offering to recycle bags – the number of carrier bags given away shows little sign of diminishing.
The bags last for hundreds of years in landfill, but the main environmental harm they caused occurs when they find their way into waterways, rivers and seas, where they can choke aquatic life, and in the carbon dioxide emissions associated with their manufacture.
Charges for the bags have already been introduced in Northern Ireland and Wales. Similar proposals are due to come into effect later this year in Scotland. In other countries, such as the Republic of Ireland, a charge has been made for years. The plan for the plastic bag charge is one of the coalition's foremost green policies, championed by both Nick Clegg and David Cameron.
While MPs criticised the government for exempting small companies from the charge, they welcomed the news that ministers would close another proposed loophole in the legislation. Biodegradeable bags were also to have been excluded from the charging scheme, but this plan has been dropped after objections. In particular, retailers and waste management companies were concerned that the mixture of biodegradeable bags, often made from starch, with standard plastic bags would be difficult for recycling plants to handle.
Walley, a Labour MP, said: "I am pleased that the government has conceded that the proposed exemption for biodegradeable plastic bags could cause problems for the UK's recycling industry, and will not now be included when the charge is introduced next year."
Paper bags and cloth carriers will be exempt from the charges.
