Government cuts could affect the UK’s ability to detect antibiotic resistance in farm animals, senior veterinary experts have warned.
The development of germs that are resistant to even the strongest of our current antibiotics is one of the biggest health threats in the world, according to the government’s chief public health official, Professor Dame Sally Davies. 
Last month the World Health Organisation said over-use of antibiotics had meant they had lost their effectiveness at fighting infections in every country in the world. Antiobiotic resistance among animals is a separate but related problem, and can have repercussions for human health.
Professor Peter Silley, of the University of Bradford, said: “Surveillance [of antibiotic resistance in animals by regular testing on farms and extensive lab work] is expensive to do properly – very expensive. But if you look at surveillance now it is much less than it was ten years ago - I think most of that is budgetary.”
He added: “If surveillance is not mandatory, that is a problem. It is expensive and will not happen. Then we will struggle. We need to fund this science properly. My concern is that we are not going to be able to do that.”
The Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, which has responsibility for agriculture and animal health, has accepted some of the steepest cuts of any Whitehall department. Defra had not responded at the time of publication.
John Fitzgerald, secretary general of the Responsible Use of Medicines in Scientists at a briefing held by the Science Media Centre in London also warned that no move to curb antibiotic use in humans – such as the proposal by Davies for a United Nations convention to control antibiotic use - should be taken without similar attention to the use of the drugs in animals.
Although animal diseases are different to those of humans, and the vets said there was little evidence that increasing resistance in animals was a major threat to human health in the UK, they said that in some areas of the world antibiotic use is largely unregulated, or regulations go unenforced, and that this was a serious concern.
Professor Stuart Reid, principal of the Royal Veterinary College, said: “In the absence of good international controls, there are areas of the world that have less control, and this is a real issue. There are significant gaps we have to work on together.”
Fitzgerald said: “If there’s going to be a UN [treaty], we must add animal health, as there will otherwise be no point to it.”
Outbreaks of disease in animals that have affected humans include salmonella and campylobacter, which cause food poisoning.
But the vet said that the controversial rise of “megafarms” - where hundreds of cattle, chickens or pigs are kept in vast warehouses - was good for cutting down on animal disease, despite concerns that keeping so many animals in one place could intensify any outbreak.
Fitzgerald said: “Megafarms are not using more [antibiotics] per animal. They are bigger but much more hygienic [than other farms], they are better controlled, and significantly better designed to make sure of optimum conditions to prevent disease.”
He said the conditions were carefully managed to avoid disease outbreaks, and their owners had a vested interest in keeping their “biosecurity” tight, because it would prove so expensive if drugs had to be used.
In Europe, using antibiotics in a routine way - whether animals are sick or not, to encourage the beasts to grow faster - has been outlawed since 2006. The vets said it was unlikely that this regulation was being flouted in the UK, because of the cost of the drugs and the oversight of veterinary professionals.
Concerns have also been raised about the widespread use of antibiotics in fish farming, but in the UK their use among fish has come down in recent years, according to Prof Silley.However, these practices are still widespread in other countries, including the US and South America.
Prof Reid said: “In the US, there are challenges [because of] the use of growth promotion is still allowed. What happens elsewhere [in some countries] is a completely unregulated environment.”
He added: “Sometimes I’m disappointed that there is not a holistic view being taken.”
