The government is to make drastic changes to its financial support for solar energy farms, in a move condemned by green activists and renewable power companies as likely to reduce the UK's ability to generate low-carbon power and green jobs, and to increase dependency on imports of fossil fuels.
It is the second major blow to renewable energy within a month, following the announcement that the Conservatives want to axe subsidies to new onshore windfarms if they win the next election.
But the government insisted the changes were necessary in order to ensure subsidies were fair and that renewable energy targets would still be reached, while keeping down costs for consumers.
A government spokesman said the new system would be fairer, and create "the right balance of support for renewables … securing the further investment we need to provide clean, green and secure energy, while continuing to deliver value for money for energy billpayers".
Paul Barwell, chief executive of the Solar Trade Association, said the proposals - which are now out for consultation and are likely to come into force next April - were a "crippling blow" to the fledgling solar industry, and unfair because they did not affect other forms of renewable energy. He said: "The industry will be alarmed by these proposals and surprised to be singled out for harsh treatment."
Alasdair Cameron, energy campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said the plans would further harm the prospects for the solar industry, which has suffered repeated upheavals in the past four years as the coalition government has tinkered with the subsidy system.
He said: "Financial support for solar has already fallen, and any further reductions should only be carried out in a planned way as [the] costs [of the equipment] drop. But suddenly pulling the rug out from under a popular growing clean energy industry makes no sense, and would put thousands of jobs at risk."
The UK currently has about 2.7GW of solar energy generation, enough to power about 620,000 homes. The government said its proposals would keep the UK on track for its new target of having about 10 to 12GW of capacity in 2020 – itself a large decrease on estimates in 2012 by the Department of Large solar farms, above 5MW – enough to cover about 15 football pitches – will bear the brunt of the reforms. Some of these have been controversial with local people in rural areas, from Suffolk to Devon. Instead of receiving a direct payment in relation to the amount of power they generate, in future these farms will be forced to compete with other sources of renewable energy such as onshore wind turbines and energy-from-waste plants, for a limited pot of available cash that is ultimately paid by energy consumers. But this system – known as "contracts for difference" under the government's electricity market reforms – is complex and offputting, according to solar companies, as well as creating uncertainty as to their future returns, which may deter investors.
The move is being seen as another victory for the right-wing of the Conservative party, many of whom are opposed to what the prime minister has been alleged to call "green crap", such as renewable energy measures that add to consumer bills. In March, the Tory energy minister Michael Fallon declared to parliament that there would be no further changes to the "renewable obligation" - the old system of subsidy that benefited solar farms - before 2017. Solar companies alleged on Tuesday that he had made a major U-turn.
Amid the bad news for big solar installations, there were crumbs of comfort for smaller scale renewables. Community solar energy projects, with people clubbing together to put up panels in their local area, will be allowed to double their size, from 5MW to 10MW, and people who choose to put solar panels on their roofs can expect a bigger share of the subsidy pot than farmers and other large property owners who choose ground-mounted models.
