British people who have seen a nightjar, a pine marten or a golden eagle in the wild are one of a lucky few, according to a new survey.
They are the top three among Britain's most seldom-seen creatures. Other elusive species include the beaver, red squirrel, stoat and adder.
Nightjars were once one of the most enchanting sights of a British summer night, flying low in copses where they congregated at dusk. But a massive loss of habitat and intensive farming have sent populations of the shy bird crashing. In the poll, published on Thursday, only about 4% of people reported seeing a nightjar in the wild. Most people believe them to be extinct, according to the research.
About seven in 10 people have never seen an adder, the UK's only poisonous snake, while two-thirds have never seen a dormouse. The research, called the Natural Curiosities report, involved a survey of 2,000 British adults, who were asked whether they had ever seen any of 20 of the most elusive creatures in the wild. Even Sir Sir David, who will present a new programme on curious wildlife from around the world next week on TV channel Watch, said: "I have been lucky enough to see most of the animals listed in the wild except the pine marten, which are exceptionally hard to spot as they live up in the tree tops. It is interesting to note that many of our supposedly common species are also hard to spot in the wild."
Even some common species remain unseen by large numbers of the population. Sir David said: "The fact that a quarter of British adults have never seen a wild hedgehog suggests that we are witnessing rapidly dwindling numbers."
Eight out of 10 of the people polled said they were concerned at dwindling numbers of iconic wildlife in the UK, and 68% said the government should be doing more on wildlife conservation.
According to the report, there are probably only about 4,000 breeding pairs of nightjars in the UK, and an estimated 442 pairs of golden eagles. Eagles and other birds of prey have been targeted by gamekeepers in some parts of the country, in the belief that they deplete the number of game birds for shoots. It is illegal to kill the birds, but there has been a spate of prosecutions over suspected poisonings of birds of prey in recent years.
Stoats and weasels were once a common sight, but there are now less than 500,000 in the country. There are estimated to be about 16,000 pairs of cuckoos still breeding, but their unmistakable cry – traditionally heralding the start of summer – has been heard by only about one-fifth of the population, as their numbers decline.
Among the other top 10 "most elusive creatures" are slow worms – really a lizard – and kingfishers, so quick that they are often seen as just a blue flash above a river.
