"Unexpected item in the bagging area. Please remove." Anyone who has ever attempted to cut down on plastic bag use by bringing their own when shopping will be familiar with the robotic admonition. Carefully packing up a hessian sack on grocery expeditions can seem a lonely crusade at times, as the queue behind you quietly fumes. The Environment Agency didn't help, with its recent pronouncement that it would take 131 uses of a cloth bag to cancel out the carbon emissions of a plastic alternative. And this week the government's plans to charge for plastic bags have come under fire.

We need to be clear about some of the myths surrounding plastic bags. Yes, they may take 400 years to decompose in landfill, but that misses the point. Taking a long time to decompose in landfill is a good thing, as it means the nasty chemicals incorporated in the manufacture of the bags are not leaching into the groundwater. 
Greenhouse gas emissions are also, in this case, a red herring. Single-use bags may be relatively light on carbon dioxide in their manufacture, but that is no measure of their real impact on the environment.

The real issue with plastic bags can be found on our pavements, our parks, our beaches and in the sea. Plastic bags filled with dog poo and carefully deposited at the side of the path – why would anyone do that? – are now the number one cause of litter on our beaches and coastal areas, according to the Marine Conservation Society. When they find their way into the air and into the sea, they are even more obscene. Birds and fish cannot digest plastic, and they choke on them, or die with intestines packed full of plastic. There is an area in the Pacific known as the garbage patch that is so full of plastic it takes days to sail through, and can be seen from space. Now a similar area has been found at the other side of the world, near Australia, and our own European beaches are filling up with the stuff.

Plastic bags are a plague, and we do not need them. Supermarkets are rather coy about whether their increasing use of automated checkouts is encouraging the over-use of plastic bags, but what is certain is that the proliferation of single-use bags is astonishingly high - more than 190 per EU citizen in 2012 alone.

But the results from experiments in charging for plastic bag use are good. Take Northern Ireland, where a charge was brought in last year, and people have accepted it as a public good. People now bring shopping bags with them when they go out – exactly as it used to be, and hardly an infringement of civil liberties. In an admittedly unscientific poll of shoppers in central Belfast last year, no one I asked was against the charge.

The coalition is doing the right thing by introducing a charge, one of Nick Clegg's few policy achievements in government. It needs to be done right. A clear signal that requires all shops to charge the same amount for single-use bags is the way to go, as the experience in Northern Ireland, Wales and other areas has shown. We do not need a raft of exemptions that would allow a small Tesco Metro to give out bags for free while its out-of-town brother charges. We do need to distinguish between biodegradable bags and the plastic alternatives, and that will require refinement but is not impossible.

If we want to rid ourselves of this wholly unnecessary burden, the implications are clear: a single plastic bag charge, applicable to all single-use bags and with the minimum of exemptions. The results will benefit all of us.
