Shale gas is no more than a long-term possibility for the UK and should not be a key plank of energy policy for the next decade, one of the most senior Liberal Democrats in the cabinet has warned.
His views are at odds with the attitude of many senior members of the Tory party, who have spoken out in favour of shale gas exploitation as a form of indigenous energy that could bring down energy bills and an alternative to investment in renewable energy.
David Cameron, the prime minister, recently announced that the government was going "all out" for shale gas. But Cable was notably cooler, telling the Guardian: "Shale gas is a long-term possibility – no more than that."
He said renewable energy offered more immediate opportunities. "Big renewable energy commitments in offshore wind, and nuclear – these are things that are actually happening, are going ahead."
He added: "I do realise there are some people who are a bit carried away with shale gas."
His comments came as a group of landowners in a national park launched a bid to prevent a company from drilling under their properties.
Residents near the village of Fernhurst, West Sussex, in the South Downs national park, are launching a legal blockade against drilling under their land. Solicitors acting on behalf of the group have written to oil and gas company Celtique Energie and the energy secretary, Campaigners say the move could be replicated across the country by communities opposing fracking. It comes as the government considers changing trespass laws to make it easier for companies to drill under people's homes.
Lord Browne, the former chief executive of BP and now chairman of Cuadrilla, the only company to have used modern hydraulic fracturing techniques in the UK, has also said he is cautious about the timescale because of planning objections. He told the Guardian it would take five years to discover whether the shale gas reserves of the UK could be profitably exploited.
Cable said that the real future for oil and gas in the UK was the North Sea. "Shale is a possible long-term resource, but we do not yet know. I want to tell people to get realistic about it.
"I do not think people in industry expect it to make a great deal of difference within a decade. Beyond that, it depends on geology, communities willing to accommodate it, companies willing to invest."
He said he did not think anyone is expecting much within five years, but that wind farms will be going ahead substantially in the next five years.
"No one is saying that shale gas is an alternative [to renewables] – it is complementary," he said.
Some Tories, and the influential energy economist Dieter Helm, have said shale is a more economic proposition than renewables.
Cable said: "I'm not opposed [to shale gas] but we need to get things in proportion. Incentives are being given – it would be silly not to have them."
There have been significant problems in the UK's renewable energy market in recent months, with the withdrawal or postponement of plans for some major offshore wind developments and the announcement by the German company RWE npower that it would dramatically scale back its investments in wind in the UK.
Cable also strongly criticised Ed Miliband's pledge that energy companies would face a freeze on domestic energy bills if Labour should win the next election.
"The Labour party freezing energy has freaked out some energy companies. They do not know if they will be allowed to make money. That is a political intervention that has not been helpful."
