The UK's "big six" energy suppliers have made an unwarranted intervention into politics, Prescott, now a Labour lord, told the Guardian that the companies were "becoming very politicised" and were serving the interests of their shareholders rather than their customers or the general public. He said they had been encouraged by allegations last year that David Cameron, the prime minister, had vowed to "get rid of the green crap" from energy bills, including payments for energy efficiency and subsidies for renewable energy.
Prescott said: "They [the big six] are getting into politics – they are very political. They are all shaping up to blame Ed Miliband. They have been mobilised by David Cameron's saying about the green crap. We will see a lot more of this from them."
Miliband, the Labour leader, pledged last autumn to freeze energy bills for two years if his party came to power next year, as part of his drive to cut the rising cost of living. Several energy companies reacted by saying that investment in new infrastructure would have to be cut.
Before Miliband's pledge, the outgoing head of the energy regulator, Ofgem, warned last summer that the risk of power cuts had increased, because most of the UK's ageing nuclear reactors and coal-fired power stations were likely to come out of service by the end of this decade. Several energy companies echoed that warning.
Prescott believes the warnings the energy companies have put out about the possibility of power cuts are intended to alarm consumers, gain new concessions and justify rising bills, which are now at record levels. He said the alarms had intensified following Miliband's pledge.
"They have exploited their profits," he said, in an interview. "They do not have the public interest at heart – they are only interested in profit."
He accused the coalition government of encouraging the big energy companies to get involved in political controversies. "David Cameron has joined them by ditching his climate change programme. George Osborne is doing it too."
Energy UK, which represents the UK's energy companies, did not reply to a request for comment.
Prescott is leading a debate in the European parliament in Strasbourg on Thursday, when he will call for the United Nations process of climate change negotiations to encompass both international and national greenhouse gas emissions targets and recognise the contribution made by efforts by organisations and companies to cut emissions on the ground, in a way that is not always currently captured by national targets.
