A report in September by David Mackay, the chief scientific adviser at the Department of Energy and Climate Change, looked in detail at the impact of shale gas on greenhouse gas emissions. It found that shale gas – obtained by fracking, a process that involves fracturing dense shale rock by blasting it with high-pressure water and chemicals to release trapped bubbles of gas – could indeed have a lower carbon impact than imports of gas from abroad, for instance in the form of liquefied natural gas.
Mackay compared the emissions of shale gas with those from the liquefied natural gas (LNG) that the UK currently imports, largely from Qatar, and concluded the two were very similar. The report states: "The principal effect of UK shale gas production and use will be that it displaces imported LNG, or possibly piped gas from outside Europe. The net effect on total UK [greenhouse gas] emissions rates is likely to be small."
But overall, extracting shale gas in the UK is likely to lead to more CO2 being produced. "The production of shale gas could increase global cumulative [greehouse gas] emissions if the fossil fuels displaced by shale gas are used elsewhere," the report states.
Research from BP published last week shows that despite the predicted rise in global shale gas use, greenhouse gas emissions will continue to increase, by about 29% in the next two decades. That would put the world far beyond the limits of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that scientists say will lead to dangerous levels of climate change.
To date, shale gas use in the US has brought down emissions there (though there was a bounce in carbon output last year) but has resulted in an increase in emissions in Europe and elsewhere. That is because coal that would have been used to fire power plants in the US has been exported instead, flooding the world market with cheap coal and encouraging far higher coal-fired power generation. So extracting shale gas may lead to slightly lower emissions than imported liquid natural gas, but a European shale gas rush might mean higher emissions in the long run.
Pursuing shale gas will not necessarily cut emissions without other mechanisms such as a strong price on carbon – the government's own research, the International 