European Greens are considering a challenge to the UK's tax breaks and incentives for shale gas under state aid rules, as the government holds out against a new renewable energy target for the EU.
Ministers have offered tax breaks to shale gas companies, and incentives to local communities to encourage them to accept drilling in their area. The government believes its plans comply with EU rules restricting state aid to companies.
On Wednesday, the The threat to challenge the government's shale gas incentives is retaliation for that, and for Britain's attempts to foil a proposed directive on shale gas that would impose firm regulations on its exploitation.
The Guardian understands several European commissioners are still objecting to the proposed emissions target, favouring a lower goal of 35% cuts by 2030. A compromise may be reached by Wednesday, potentially by introducing greater flexibility on renewable energy.
The UK, France and Green MEPs are arguing in favour of much stronger targets. Emissions in the EU are set to be about 25% below 1990 levels in 2020, leaving a further cut of about 15% by 2030.
At stake is the future of world governments' response to climate change, which will be decided at a crunch conference in Paris in 2015, under the A study by several academic research institutions, under the banner of the Stanford The UK is holding out against a renewables target, arguing that a mandated emissions reduction is enough. It is understood that the Treasury wants to be able to include nuclear power and fears that a renewable energy target would mean less investment in its favoured alternative, shale gas. Other member states, including Germany, are firmly in favour of an EU-wide target, as the current renewables goal is credited with bringing about strong growth in clean energy across the EU.
The European commission argues that an EU-wide target enables greater flexibility, as some member states, including the UK, can take on a lower share of the target as others, such as Germany, power ahead on renewables. The target would also allow for investment in renewable energy overseas to be counted.
But the government's position has been criticised by campaigners and are understood to have discouraged renewable energy companies. RWE recently announced plans to drastically scale back its investment in clean energy in the UK.
Asad Rehman, international climate campaigner at Claude Turmes, vice chair of the Green Group of MEPs, said: "It is important that we ensure ambitious and coherent binding targets for greenhouse gas reductions, renewables and energy savings. This would provide much-needed investor certainty, not only in the energy sector but for industrial sectors and innovation across He added that a renewable energy target was needed to encourage investment in clean technology. "Given the undeniable success of the 2020 renewable energy target, it is imperative that the EU continues the momentum and adopts a binding 2030 target. Failure to do so would cause massive uncertainty at a time when we need to be rapidly moving ahead towards a renewable-energy-based economy."
