The UK's push for shale gas will result in unavoidable changes to the countryside, the US energy secretary has warned. Ernest Moniz, who took over as energy chief for President Obama's second term, has overseen arguably the biggest changes to US energy production since the discovery of oil.
He said the exploitation of shale gas and oil on a vast scale in the US had been "transformative", vastly reducing energy prices, boosting industry and lowering carbon emissions as more electricity production shifted from coal to gas. But he warned that any boost to the economy would come at a serious cost, as "you can't avoid" the fact that extracting gas on such a scale involves a massive industrial effort.
"The one thing it's very hard to change is that this is a big industrial enterprise. That's one thing you can't avoid. That is something communities and governments have to cope with."
UK ministers have sought to play down the environmental impacts of shale, which could involve the drilling of tens of thousands of wells throughout the countryside in order to tap the gas initially and then keep it flowing over years.
Moniz said the UK could engineer a similar revolution to that of the US, given the sizeable shale resources that geologists believe exist in the country, if they can be recovered economically. "There is a big potential, a big resource," he said.
He said that the US had experienced problems with air quality and pollution, but said this was mainly because of poor practices, such as "bad well completion, and issues with well casing". Using industry best practices could minimise this impact.
Although shale has helped to cut emissions in the US in recent years – they rose again last year, perhaps partly in response to a bounce in gas prices that has kept some coal-fired power stations burning – that effect has not been replicated globally. That is because unburnt coal no longer required in the US has flooded world markets, resulting in a substantially increased use of the high-carbon fuel.
In its Global Moniz acknowledged that natural gas could be seen as "part of the solution, and part of the problem". He said, however, that it could be positive in helping to bring down US emissions owing to the switch from coal, when taken alongside President Obama's push for higher fuel efficiency for vehicles.
Joss Garman, deputy political director of Greenpeace, said the UK and the US should be seeking to invest more in renewable energy as a way of cutting emissions and avoiding dangerous climate change. He told the Guardian: "By making oil and gas production so central to America's economic plans, President Obama's team are strengthening the very vested interests that have made it so difficult for successive Democrat administrations to achieve action on climate change over the last few decades.
"It's now plain dangerous as well as unnecessary for the US and the rest of the world to keep drilling the last drops of dirty fuels, whether those fossil fuels are under the Arctic ice, or beneath the fields of the English countryside. Clean, affordable energy sources exist and should be used instead."
Moniz also called for the US to put much more effort into adapting to the effects of climate change. He cited Hurricane Sandy as an example of the costly damage that can be inflicted. "We have spent more on recovery than on preparation [for the effects of climate change]," he said.
A spokesman for the Department of Energy and Climate Change said: "The government has been clear that wherever shale gas fracking is conducted it must be done in a safe and environmentally sound way. There are regulations in place to ensure on-site safety, prevent water contamination, air pollution and mitigate seismic activity.
"The Environment Agency will assess the permitting requirements for each proposal on a site-by-site basis, considering the design of the operations and its proximity to ground and surface waters. The government believes that shale gas has the potential to provide the UK with greater energy security, growth and jobs."
