UK taxpayer money will no longer go to fund dirty coal-fired power stations in developing countries, the energy secretary Ed Davey announced on Wednesday at the climate change talks in Warsaw.

Davey said the move, which is in conjunction with the US and several other European countries, would help to cut greenhouse gas emissions in developing countries and encourage low-carbon development.

Since 2007, the UK has provided about $500m (£310m) to coal projects, mostly through its share in development banks such as the World Bank, according to figures collated by the US Natural Resource Defense Council (NRDC), and seen by the Guardian. The US has provided nearly $9bn over the same period, Germany about $6bn and Japan nearly $20bn.

The governments will also put pressure on development banks to ensure that their funding policies rule out coal. The World Bank has already agreed to tighten its lending criteria to exclude coal except where there is little alternative.

Davey conceded that there could be a few "rare circumstances" in which money could be given to coal projects but these would have to prove that there was no viable alternative, and subscribe to the highest technological standards.

But he did not support moves from the House of Lords to phase out existing coal-fired power stations in the UK by putting in place a new emissions standard that would mean they could only run if fitted with carbon capture and storage technology, which is as yet untested.

He said: "It is completely illogical for countries such as the UK and the US to be decarbonising our energy sectors while paying for coal-fired power plants to be built in other countries. It undermines global efforts to prevent dangerous climate change and stores up a future financial time bomb for those countries [where they are built]."

Coal has been a particularly charged issue at this year's United Nations climate change talks, as the Polish government has awarded a prominent role to the coal industry at the talks, with a special two-day side conference dedicated to coal. About 90% of the country's electricity comes from coal, and the government has been resistant to EU calls to strengthen emissions reduction targets.

Davey's move to phase out coal funding from overseas aid and development money was welcomed by environmental campaigners, but many called for more action at home.

Ruth Davis, political director at Greenpeace, said: "Ed Davey and David Cameron should be congratulated for following President Obama in supporting an end to taxpayer support for the great majority of dirty coal energy projects around the world. It's about time ministers stopped using British families' cash to help bankroll new, highly polluting coal power stations overseas. Burning coal doesn't just drive dangerous climate change it destroys local air and water quality and costs tens of thousands of lives every year."

But she added: "Now that the age of coal is coming to an end, ministers must also ensure they can't be accused of hypocrisy, by taking action to close the loophole in the energy bill that could otherwise see the UK's own dirtiest coal stations thrown a lifeline, and allowed another decade of unlimited carbon."

Asad Rehman, climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: "Ending support for new overseas coal-fired power stations is certainly a welcome step, but if the coalition really wants to show climate leadership it must pull the plug on its backing for more gas and oil at home. Ministers must take real steps to break the UK's fossil fuel addiction by ending tax-breaks for gas and oil, developing comprehensive energy efficiency programmes and harnessing the nation's huge renewable power potential."

President Obama made the US's first move to ban funding for overseas coal in June, with a call to other countries to follow suit. In September, he and the leaders of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden made a joint statement to that effect.

Jake Schmidt of the US-based NRDC, said: "This is an important step by the UK to stop funding overseas coal projects. As a major financial player they have huge weight in moving more countries to stop using public funding for these projects." He said it sent a clear message to the Germans and Japanese that they are "the last big funders of overseas coal projects to take this step".
