UK industry and manufacturing are being put at a serious competitive disadvantage by the low price of energy in rival nations, chiefly the US, according to a major report published on Tuesday.
As much as 10% of Europe's market for energy-intensive industrial products, including iron and steel, glass and chemicals, could go to competitor nations within the next decade, it said. The finding has profound consequences for jobs, the economic recovery and climate change policies, and will send shockwaves through European industry.
The International Energy Agency – regarded as the gold standard for energy data – warned that Europe, Japan and other nations were being outpaced by the US in competitive terms, because of the very low price of energy in America resulting from the shale gas boom there. In its annual World Energy Outlook, the organisation warned that the price differential was likely to endure for decades.
Fatih Birol, chief economist at the IEA and one of the world's foremost analysts of energy, told the Guardian: "Today, there is a substantial gap between the US and Europe in gas and electricity prices. This is a serious problem for Europe. It's even more serious because this differential in prices will remain for at least the next 20 years."
He predicted that energy intensive industries in the UK and Europe would suffer a 10% decline in their international market share. "This will have huge costs in terms of employment, as there will be significant losses. There will be a knock-on effect on the whole economy."
Energy prices around the world have been transformed by the US push to exploit fracking for shale gas, the controversial form of gas extracted by blasting high-pressure water and chemicals at dense shale rocks. Only four years ago, according to the IEA, Europe's gas prices were roughly the same as those in the US. Now, they are three times higher. In Japan, prices are about five times higher.
The result is that manufacturing and heavy industries in the US are finding their costs drastically reduced. As a result, many companies that abandoned the US for their manufacturing operations for nations with cheaper labour, such as China, are now returning to the US. A few days ago, and a decade after closing its last US manufacturing plant, Apple announced a new factory with 2,000 jobs making crystals to be used in iPads. Motorola is now making phones in the US, at a plant in Texas.
British manufacturers have begun pressing the government to roll back so-called "green levies" added to energy bills, as a way of cutting their costs, and have secured a promise from David Cameron to review the additions to energy bills. Gareth Stace, head of environment and climate policy at the EEF, which represents manufacturers, said: "The IEA report confirms what industry in the UK knows, namely that high energy prices, especially for energy intensive companies are damaging our competitiveness and the ability of companies to invest in energy efficiency. Government urgently needs to review its approach to green and growth policies if we are to effectively reduce our energy costs whilst, at the same time, meeting our climate change obligations."
However, the IEA found that green measures accounted for a tiny amount of the difference in energy costs in the US v the EU. The analysis found that even if Europe had no price on carbon, the 10% decline in international market share would be reduced only to a 9% decline. "The difference is minimal, if not negligible," said Birol. That is because the main source of the price differential in the US's favour is the low cost of shale gas there. Europe is unlikely to be able to emulate the US's exploitation of shale gas and oil, partly because it lacks the natural resources and favourable geology, and also because the continent is so much more densely populated.
Birol said the analysis showed that green measures should not be abandoned, and that Europe could weather the storm if several steps were taken. He recommended that European countries should renegotiate their gas contracts with overseas suppliers, two-thirds of which are up for renewal within the next decade. "That is crucial," he said. Most of the contracts were negotiated 10 or 20 years ago, when the outlook for gas was poorer, and so could be brought down markedly in price. Another recommended measure is energy efficiency, which has lagged behind in Europe. A further measure is to invest more in domestic energy supply, including shale gas but also nuclear energy and renewables, which Birol said could be exploited in a cost-effective way, without damage to competitiveness.
