Banning the wasteful practice of discarding edible fish at sea will not be enough to save dwindling fish stocks, a group of scientists have warned.

The ending of discards is a key European Union fisheries policy, and after a hard-fought battle over the past three years with the fishing industry and among some member states, an agreement was signed to phase out the practice gradually from 2015 to 2019. The Fish Fight campaign by Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, the chef and Guardian food writer, was cited by the European Commission as a key factor in winning the battle.

But without strict limits on how much of each species can be caught, the ban will be ineffective, according to a study by the University of East Anglia and the Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture, published on Monday. Researchers examined what would happen with a discards ban alone, the effects of tougher quotas and how fishing fleets could be monitored in order to ensure that they do not illegally land fish.

"The discards ban is not the great victory that the public seem to think," said Prof Alastair Grant, one of the authors of the research.

The 
However, in the process of the changes, more power over catches will be devolved to member states. There is a danger, according to the researchers, that they could undermine the process.

"Politicians have sometimes negotiated higher catches," said Grant. "There will be a question over how individual member states comply."



As much as half the catch of some fishing fleets is thrown back into the sea, dead. That is because sometimes fishermen catch more than their quota of a certain species, or because they catch species for which they have no quota. But some fishermen have objected to the banning of discards, because they believe it could lower their profits - discarding allows them to throw back lower value specimens and maximise their profits from their quota.


But the UEA research found that, if appropriate quota measures are put in place, landing their whole catch need not cut fishermen's revenues. "It does not necessarily result in a smaller income, and there can be a small increase in profits," said Harriet Condie, lead author of the study.

The European Commission told the Guardian: "The banning of discarding is one element of the new fisheries policy, but it is only successful in combination with other elements of the reform such as strong catch quotas based on scientific assessment, long-term planning and reaching maximum sustainable yield."

The spokesman added: "Besides this, it is just unethical to throw back large quantities of unwanted dead fish. It should not have been fished in the first place."
