The UK must continue to show leadership on green issues if crunch negotiations to tackle climate change are to be successful, Europe's climate chief has warned.
On the eve of crucial international talks in Warsaw on tackling climate change, deep rifts within the coalition over environmental policies, including David Cameron's pledge to review green levies on energy bills, have left confusion and ill-feeling over the core policy. Nick Clegg warned on Thursday: "The green consensus across the political parties is, I'm afraid, falling away – and at the worst possible time."
Connie Hedegaard, European commissioner for climate change, told the Guardian: "I hope to hear from the big parties that this is not the case. The countries that want to keep a certain level of ambition [on moving to a low-carbon economy] are very important – we need these countries to show through their concrete actions [that this is possible]. Britain has played a key role in the The meeting itself has already attracted controversy because the Polish hosts have insisted on giving a prominent role to the coal industry, which provides most of the country's power and much of its exports. Energy derived from burning coal is highly carbon-intensive.
The Warsaw talks are not expected to produce a breakthrough, but they must lay the groundwork for an effort next year to draw up the draft text of a new agreement. That agreement is expected to be signed at a meeting in Paris in 2015.
Christiana Figueres, the UN's leading official on climate change, told the Guardian that said the recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, warning that within decades the world would breach the "carbon budget" needed to hold temperature rises to less than 2C, was a "huge wakeup call" to governments. "This is very serious data, which puts a lot of the onus on developed countries to truly support the transformation developing countries have to make [to a low-carbon economy]," she said.
Figueres also called for governments to spur low-carbon technology by setting out clear policies: "We know that the clearer the political signal is, the more technology [companies] respond with eco-innovation."
She said ministers at the talks should understand that the negotiations were "not a zero-sum game, where some win and some lose. We are all in this together," she said. "Every country needs to act. They will be guided by their national circumstances and also be guided by our collective needs and collective interest."
There is still no consensus on what legal form the agreement will take, what commitments nations will make on emissions curbs, or how to raise the financing developing countries want to help them move to a low-carbon path.
Todd Stern, US special envoy for climate change, said the old divide of countries into developed (with obligations to cut emissions) and developing countries (with no such obligations) enshrined in the Kyoto protocol was outdated and needed to change to an accord that would be "applicable to all". But he argued, in a speech at Chatham House in London, for a large degree of flexibility in the talks, allowing nations to set their own emissions targets. He suggested that rather than a rigid system like the Kyoto protocol, putting pressure on countries through the weight of public opinion could be more effective.
"While the system of strict rules and compliance might sound good on paper, it would almost certainly depress the ambition of countries [in setting emissions goals] and limit participation by countries. The opposite is true for [relying on] norms and expectations, which countries will want to meet to enhance their global standing and reputation."

Another controversy that could bedevil the talks is the question of "loss and damage", which some developing countries have interpreted as compensation and reparations to be paid by rich to poor nations. Rich countries reject this, pointing out that developing country emissions are rising rapidly while those of industrialised countries are falling.

Figueres said: "It is not the first time someone has come to the table with expectations of compensation. But I do not see the space for that kind of measure."
