A group of more than 40 companies and other organisations have called on the prime minister to keep the only regulation that forces energy firms to fund energy efficiency improvements for low-income households.
Spending by utilities under the Energy Companies Obligation (ECO) amounts to about £1.3bn. David Cameron has floated the idea of scrapping the ECO, which his government introduced, to help cut fuel bills.
The saving would amount to less than £50 per household per year, on average energy bills of more than £1,200 a year. The Liberal Democrats have vowed to keep the so-called green taxes in place.
On Monday the former Lib Dem energy secretary Chris Huhne wrote in the Guardian that green charges saved money because they reduced our reliance on expensive imports of gas, the rising cost of which has been the main factor in increasing energy bills.
A letter to Cameron signed by organisations including the Federation of Master Builders, the National Paul King, chief executive of the Green Building Council, which organised the letter, said: "Business leaders are sending a powerful message to David Cameron: do not scrap the Energy Company Obligation. Cutting back schemes designed to boost energy efficiency is an incredibly short-sighted view and one that will only result in higher bills in the medium- to long-term for those most vulnerable from rocketing energy prices."
The letter complains that the government's flagship green deal, by which households can take out loans to cover the cost of energy efficient improvements, has not worked. Instead they call for a new measure based on stamp duty. By offering cuts in stamp duty for homeowners who install energy efficiency measures such as solid wall insulation, the letter says, more people would be persuaded to improve their homes.
Stamp duty revenues to the government are set to rise sharply as the housing market has recovered strongly, and the government's new Help to Buy scheme is likely to increase the rate of new purchases even further.
King said: "Energy efficiency is the only guaranteed way to combat rising energy bills and it defies belief that the prime minister is considering rolling back one of the government's biggest initiatives to achieve this."
The Department of Energy and Climate Change said: "The government is looking at how to get people's energy bills as low as possible to help hard-pressed families. We've already increased competition, brought new players in to the market to offer consumers real choice and the most vulnerable are getting direct help with their bills this winter. We'll continue this work to make sure consumers are getting a good deal."
The department declined to comment on the future of the ECO.
