Anti-GM campaigners are not "wicked", as the environment secretary has said, but are defending the global food economy against a "tiny handful of global corporations" that want to control it, according to a fellow Tory MP.
Zac Goldsmith has provoked a row within the Conservative ranks by attacking the views of In an article in Thursday's Guardian, Goldsmith said Paterson's views on genetic modification were staggering.
"GM has never been about feeding the world, or tackling environmental problems. It is and has always been about control of the global food economy by a tiny handful of giant corporations. It's not wicked to question that process. It is wicked not to," he wrote.
The genetic modification of food has been opposed by many with environmental concerns because of the potential consequences such as a rise in pests and weeds resistant to pesticides and herbicides; the control of the food chain by a handful of global corporations, or the possibility that the crops will escape into the wild and pollinate other crops, with unknown consequences.
Goldsmith took particular issue with Paterson's championing of "golden rice", which is designed to tackle blindness in humans caused by a deficiency in vitamin A. Goldsmith pointed out that golden rice is still not available for commercial planting, and argued that a better way of dealing with the problem would be to make sure that people have access to the foodstuffs, particularly vegetables, that provide vitamin A in a balanced diet.
He also said that significant advances could be made in crop science by using other biotechnology methods, stopping short of Paterson's comments were the most strident intervention by an environment secretary in the GM debate to date.
He told the Independent in an interview: "It's just disgusting that little children are allowed to go blind and die because of a hang-up by a small number of people about this technology. I feel really strongly about it. I think what they do is absolutely wicked. There is no other word for it."
He accused green campaigning groups of "casting a dark shadow over attempts to feed the world".
His predecessor, Caroline Spelman, also favoured GM crops.
The issue is controversial within the government as many Liberal Democrat MPs are uneasy about the technology, and the decision by Paterson to make it a major debate and by his colleague Goldsmith to take him up on it could signal further ructions within the Tories over the direction of green policies.
Goldsmith's stance highlights the extent of Tory and coalition divisions on "green" issues. David Cameron suggested in parliament on Wednesday that "green levies" – which would push up energy bills – should be pared back, but the Lib Dems insisted that green measures were designed not only to improve the environment, but would save money. Labour accused Cameron of reneging on his promise to "vote blue, go green".
