Warmer, wetter winters and more extreme rainfall are what the UK can expect from climate change, meteorological experts warned on Friday.

Although the report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) does not go into detail on individual countries, the regional and global trends identified in the assessment can be extrapolated to reflect some of the likely impacts on Britain.

Dr Peter Stott, of the Those extremes would be reflected in temperature rises too, he said: "The warmest days will become hotter than they would have been."

However, scientists cautioned that natural variability will continue to play a big role in determining the UK's weather, so there will continue to be exceptional cold snaps and cool summers. New research not yet included in the IPCC also suggests there may be a link between the melting of the Arctic and duller, wetter summers in the UK, said Stott, but this is still in its early stages.

And a further factor could complicate the picture in Britain. The IPCC report identified a potential weakening of a major system of ocean currents called the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). That weakening could slightly dampen the effects of warming on Europe. But Matt Collins of Exeter University said it was unlikely to cause an absolute cooling: "It could offset some of the warming, but really the greenhouse gas signal wins over the AMOC.

It may be slightly less warm than it otherwise would have been."
Our seas are growing more acidic, too, and if this continues it could start to have an impact on marine life around the UK. A recent study found molluscs were likely to be particularly at risk.

Oceans play a huge and as yet insufficiently well-understood role in absorbing the heat increases generated by greenhouse gas emissions – the IPCC authors suggested they had taken in at least 90% of the warming so far. If that is the case, could we forget about cutting emissions and leave the oceans to suck up the excess heat? No, said the IPCC – temperatures would continue to rise, as they have done in the last century.
