
Fraught negotiations over a landmark review of the world's knowledge of climate change were making slow progress on Thursday with just hours to go before early Friday's deadline .
The negotiations are likely to go on through the night, as countries and scientists wrangle over how to assess the global threat from greenhouse gas emissions.
At stake are projections – such as those of future temperature increases, sea level rises and the frequency of extreme weather – that will inform and guide government policies around the world for years to come.
But people involved with the talks told the Guardian that progress had been patchy and slow as delegates debate the precise wording of the 50-plus page summary.
The details are crucial, because this report is the first for nearly seven years and will be used as the ultimate authority on climate science, which will in turn guide critical negotiations on emissions policy.
The world's leading climate scientists have been locked into a Stockholm conference centre since Monday, thrashing out the final points of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change assessment report on the science of global warming.
They are scheduled to deliver their report by 8am local time on Friday at the latest, with the details to be publicly presented two hours later.
While some of the details may seem arcane – is greater rainfall in parts of the world that are already wet likely, very likely, highly likely or virtually certain? – the results will be used by policymakers to guide vital decisions. More immediately, scientists are acutely conscious that they must make their report watertight.
In 2009, two years after the last assessment report on the science, which ran to more than 1,000 pages, a handful of the IPCC's projections were found to be inaccurate. Most of the mistakes were trivial, but one stood out as a glaring and embarrassing error – a claim that the glaciers of the Himalayas could almost disappear by 2035.
That was later found to be wildly wrong, but a claim that potentially affects the lives of hundreds of millions of people who depend on the glaciers for their water should have been investigated far more closely.
The error was not repeated in the most important part of the report, the summary for policymakers. Those revelations were seized on by climate sceptics, who saw them as evidence that the whole edifice of climate science was shaky.
The new assessment is only the fifth since world governments decided in 1988 to look seriously at the threat posed by global warming. Sceptics have been highly active ahead of Friday's report in contesting scientific claims. They have been well organised, according to Lord Stern, the world's leading expert on the economics of climate change, and funded by vested interests, according to the UN.
Friday is far from the end of this long process, which has involved more than 800 scientists working unpaid and meeting several times a year.
What the Stockholm meeting will deliver is the distillation of the first part of a much larger report. The fifth assessment report - called AR5 in the climate science jargon – will come in three parts. Friday brings the summary of the first part – on the physical basis of climate science – and on 30 September, the full report behind this summary will be available in an unedited form. It will not be fully edited and published online until January 2014, and printed later next year.
The other two parts of the report – likely to run to thousands of pages and drawing on hundreds of scientific papers – will come next March and April, using a similar process of a four-day meeting of scientists leading to a summary document and then a full report published later. Those parts will examine the probable effects of climate change, and the ways in which the world can tackle the problem.
The final report encompassing all three parts – known as the synthesis report – will not be ready until October 2014, where it will be presented at a conference in Copenhagen.
