Engineers taking their ideas from nature is nothing new – from early attempts at flight, to adhesives based on mussels and communications networks that act like hives – but sometimes scientists are surprised to find humans have created concepts, when nature got there first.
The latest comes from Cambridge University, where Malcolm Burrows and Gregory Sutton have found that some insects have "gears" – in principle, much like those in cars. These rapid springs are enabled by structures in their hind legs that intermesh and rotate in the same way as the teeth and wheels in a gearbox.
The structures take the form of a curved strip of about 12 gear "teeth" on segments of each leg, known as trochanter.
The mechanism, described in the current issue of When the gear teeth on one leg are engaged with the same structure on the other leg, both legs are in effect meshed together so that when the jumping action is achieved they move in synch. This increases the power, enabling the insect to jump further than if its legs were unconnected.
Using high-speed video technology, the researchers took close-up images of the They also found another surprising detail: the "gears" are only available to the insects while they are in their youthful phase. Once the nymphs have shed their final moult on the way to becoming adults, the features disappear. Researchers are not yet sure why this might be so, but a clue may be that the successive moults enable the gears to keep their "teeth" fresh and mesh together successfully.


Fans of Marvel Comics have for years played the game of combining the powers of superheroes to pump up their invincibility levels – the strength of the Incredible Hulk when he's angry, say, with the flying speed of Superman and the web-throwing agility of Spiderman. What a hyperbeing that would be. Scientists in research laboratories play the same games – but for real. Developers at the US National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Florida have been working with one of the most powerful and mysterious natural substances – spider silk – and combining it with one of the most advanced materials made by humans – carbon nanotubes. By putting these together for the first time, researchers believe they are on the way to creating a material that could be formed into long, incredibly strong and flexible "ropes" that also conduct electricity. Such abilities could transform our puny electronic equipment into a new generation of micro-scale devices.
Spider silk – as any fan of Marvel Comics knows – is one of the strongest and most flexible natural materials. Its tensile strength makes it the envy of engineers, who have searched for decades to find ways to mimic it, including growing spider silk in the stomachs of goats so that it can be produced faster and in greater volumes than arachnids can manageunaided.
Carbon nanotubes are made by exploiting the multi-combinable structure of carbon, which allows atoms to be arranged into stable structures such as buckminsterfullerene, or "buckyballs", in which the atoms form a globe shape – and tubes. The stability of these arrangements means that carbon nanotubes can be strong, long and flexible.
By coating spider silk in carbon nanotubes, the team – who report on their work in the journal Comic fans may speculate about the potential for conductive spider webs – and what a superhero could do with those.
