The coalition government is failing to protect the Arctic from drilling for oil and gas, by allowing new projects to go ahead with too little scrutiny of their potential risks, the UK's parliamentary green watchdog has warned. The MPs urged a moratorium on Arctic drilling, which the coalition has so far rejected, and called on David Cameron to revisit the Arctic, where early in his leadership of the opposition he famously was photographed with huskie dogs.
MPs on the influential environmental audit select committee accused ministers of "complacency" and warned that companies embarking on drilling in the region could not guarantee that they would be able to clean up an oil spill without it causing drastic damage to a pristine landscape. They found that there was a lack of oil spill response mechanisms that have been proven to be effective in the harsh conditions of the Arctic, where freezing temperatures can make oil stickier and harder to clean, and adverse weather can prevent crews from reaching affected areas for months at a time. They examined the case of the Kulluk incident at the beginning of this year, when one of Shell's vessels ran aground in Alaska, although there was no spillage and the vessel was moved to safety. At the time, a critical report by the US government found that Shell's safety procedures were not up to scratch, and the company was not properly prepared for potential accidents in the region. Shell has decided not to drill in the region this year, as a result. In its report on Saturday, the committee found: "This case shows that oil companies and regulators are not yet in a position to demonstrate that they can ensure that oil and gas activities will be undertaken in the safest possible way in the Arctic."
The committee also pointed out that the world already has more existing oil and gas reserves than we can afford to burn if we are to avoid the most dangerous effects of climate change, as many experts have pointed out. That fact alone made exploring new reserves in the Joan Walley, chair of the committee, said: "This government is complacently standing by and watching new oil and gas drilling in the region, even though companies like Shell cannot prove they could clean up an oil spill in such harsh conditions. [And] the government has failed to provide a coherent argument to support its view that exploring for oil and gas in the Arctic is compatible with avoiding dangerous climate destabilisation."
She said that the Kulluk incident had "reinforced the case for a moratorium" on Arctic drilling, and failing that a much more stringent regulatory regime to make drilling companies liable for any damage to the landscape or marine environment arising from their activities.
Sea ice in the Arctic last year suffered its most drastic shrinkage since records began, leading to renewed fears of a "tipping point" leading to runaway global warming, because the retreating ice leaves dark areas of sea absorbing more heat, in place of the light-reflecting snow cover. Lower levels of ice cover have also been tentatively linked to an increase in the frequency of wetter, duller summers in the UK and northern Europe. The extent of sea ice loss this year will not be known until the depth of the thaw, in September, but early indications are that it could be on a similar scale as last year. Summers in the Arctic could be ice-free as soon as 2025, according to projections from the Met Office, and perhaps sooner according to other estimates.
The loss of ice has prompted a flurry of interest among companies and governments eager to use the normally frozen seas as a quicker passage for cargo vessels, linking Asia, the US and Europe with shorter shipping and trade routes. It could also allow for an easier exploitation of the oil and gas resources of the region, which are believed to be substantial, but which cannot be confirmed until further exploration has taken place.
Walley condemned this rush: "The rapidly disappearing Arctic sea ice should be a wake-up call for this government to tackle climate change, not pave the way for a corporate carve up of the region's resources."
Saturday's report from the environmental audit committee follows an assessment by the committee last year of how the coalition could protect the Arctic, and what the committee described as a disappointing response by the government. According to the committee, ministers "failed to grasp the urgency of action needed, or to set out an enhanced role for the UK in Arctic matters".
A Shell spokesman said: "Shell understands the uniqueness and importance of the Arctic, but gas and oil production from the Arctic and sub-Arctic is not new. To meet growing global energy demand and to keep energy affordable for consumers, investment in gas and oil production will be essential for many decades to come. We believe that continued dialogue between the energy industry and a range of stakeholders about responsible operations in the Arctic is fundamental. We value engagement with the UK government to ensure concerns are fully addressed."
