Cuadrilla is moving machinery into place to start drilling an exploratory oil well near the village of Balcombe in Sussex within the next few days, in its first UK venture outside Lancashire.

The company, which is the only business yet to have attempted shale gas fracking in the UK, is hoping to receive a permit from the Environment Agency by the end of this week, that would allow it to go ahead with its first exploratory well in Sussex. Drilling rigs were being moved into position on Tuesday, in anticipation of a green light, after the Environment Agency issued it with a draft permit.

A spokesman for Cuadrilla said the company had already conducted tests on the underground water aquifer in the Balcombe area, and was reassured that drilling there would not cause problems. The company has as yet no plans to frack in Sussex, however. Fracking is the process of blasting water, sand and chemicals under high pressure at dense shale rocks, opening up tiny fissures that release the bubbles of methane trapped within them, that can be collected at the surface through pipes.

Cuadrilla believes that the rock beneath Balcombe, called micrite, may yield oil without the need to frack, and that drilling a vertical then a horizontal well on the site may be enough to release the liquids and allow them to be captured. However, a final decision is some way off. The company must drill an exploratory well first to establish if oil is there and can be extracted, and then if experts find fracking is necessary to release the oil, Cuadrilla may try to do that later.

Drilling at the site has been delayed for about a month by the need for the company to undergo a public consultation on whether it should be granted a licence to generate mining waste, which requires a special permit. The company may also in future need a permit for radioactive materials, but can drill without that. The Environment Agency has decided the company does not need a separate permit for the effect of its operations on ground water.

Local campaigners in Balcombe are vehemently opposed to the drilling, citing fears over potential water and air pollution, the noise and traffic from the construction, and the effects of burning shale oil on greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. Vanessa Vine, a local campaigner, said any go-ahead for Cuadrilla would show that politicians were "not working for the greater good".

Brenda Pollack, south-east regional campaigner for Friends of the Earth, said: "Drilling in the home counties brings the threat of fracking geographically and politically closer to Westminster. Ministers must now be prepared for real resistance from their own heartlands."

More than two years ago, Cuadrilla started fracking operations at its sites in Lancashire, but these have been plagued with setbacks. The first wells gave rise to two small earthquakes, and drilling was halted for more than a year while investigations could take place. One of the results of the tremors was a damaged well casing in one of the wells, which experts said could potentially have allowed gas or fracking fluid to leak if it had continued. In the event, no leak took place, but the company was censured by the government for failing to inform regulators sooner that the well casing had been deformed.

At another of Cuadrilla's north of England sites, drilling plans had to be halted earlier in 2013 while an extended environmental assessment took place.

Fracking has become a major political and industrial issue in the UK in the past two years, after widespread shale gas exploitation in the US sent fuel prices plummeting and triggered an environmental backlash. A recently published study by the British Geological Survey found that the UK could have decades worth of gas under key areas in the north of England, and will publish a similar study on southern areas in 2014. However, the key question is how much of this can be extracted at economically viable rates.

On Thursday, a heated House of Commons debate showed the polarisation of opinion within Westminster over the issue – many MPs across the political spectrum are in favour of exploiting the potential resources, arguing that shale gas and oil will generate income and jobs. But other MPs are concerned about the effects on their constituents.

Fracking has also attracted the ire of campaigners because of last week's announcements of tax breaks for the fledgling industry, which the Treasury hopes will become a cash cow for the UK economy, though many oil and gas industry executives are sceptical.
