The horsemeat scandal has "shaken confidence" among British consumers in their food, the environment secretary has said, pledging that UK farmers should not be tarnished by the affair.
Speaking at the annual conference of the National Farmers Union Owen Paterson insisted that the UK's high standards of food production would win out, and that consumers would embrace local produce.
"British food should be recognised for its rigorous traceability and standards," he said. "Our farmers and producers must not be tarnished as a result of the fraudulent activities of criminals."
But he said horsemeat scandal is a "fantastic opportunity" for British farmers to persuade consumers of the high value of their products.
Paterson said the European Union, at his urging, had brought forward to this summer discussions on how to label food with its country of origin. Many farmers have been frustrated that current rules mean meat from other European countries can be labelled as British if it is merely packaged or processed in the UK, which they say undercuts their premium products and misleads consumers who want to buy British.
He said farmers were also less dependent on subsidies, which he said was making for a healthier industry. "In this country you have 64m people eating three meals a day. That's a great opportunity," he said. "About 22% of our food is imported but could be produced here – that is the future, not subsidies. The future is producing products the consumer wants to buy and making a profit out of them."

Peter Kendall, president of the NFU, said a survey carried out by the organisation had found more than 86% of people wanted to buy traceable food produced on British farms. About eight in 10 people polled said they wanted supermarkets to sell more food from British farms.

"Farmers have been furious about what has happened," he said. "They have spent many years working to ensure the British supply chain is fully traceable from farm to pack and have upheld strong principles, which are embodied in assurance schemes like Red Tractor.

"For me this is fundamental for consumer confidence. But more than that, I want to see retailers working on rebuilding consumer trust, improving transparency and partnership with farmers and the rest of the supply chain is critical. However, what we see currently in some sectors is real short-termism. The margin distribution in the supply chain needs more transparency and joined-up thinking if we are to tackle the dual challenges of volatility and environmental pressures," said Kendall.

Paterson also pledged to cut red tape for farmers, noting that there were 12,000 fewer inspections on dairy farms last year. However, he said the lower number of inspections would not detract from quality, the standards for British produce or the traceability of meat and other farm products.
