

The prime minister must step in urgently to rescue the UK's nuclear power programme, or risk it failing, a senior Tory has warned after French nuclear company EDF gave a downbeat report on the prospects for a new fleet of reactors in the UK.

Chairman of the influential energy and climate change committee and former Tory cabinet minister Tim Yeo said that Cameron must speak to his French counterpart, Francois Hollande, in order to decide what conditions are necessary for the state-owned French utility to fulfil its planned investment.

"This is something that can only be done by the heads of government of Britain and France," he told the Guardian. "There may need to be special arrangements for nuclear [separate from the regulation and subsidy of other forms of power]. Given the size of this investment – billions and billions, with a return on investment coming well into the 2020s – this has to involve the heads of government."

Yeo was speaking after the committee's MPs questioned 
"It is a worry for the government that EDF is so downbeat. They are the only horse left in this race and if they falter it might mean the end of the whole [nuclear] programme. The government has got to pay a lot of attention to what EDF is saying," he said.

De Rivaz told the committee that the company's first planned investment, at Hinkley, was subject to the government putting a framework in place on time. He said: "I think it's very clear that we will not be able to make our final investment decision, as we expect to make it at the end of the year without a contract for difference, and without a robust legal framework for this contract."

Contracts for difference are the key plank of the government's plans for electricity market reform. Under the contracts, low-carbon power generators – nuclear and renewable energy – would receive guarantees that the long-term price for their electricity was likely to be higher than the price they could get on the open market. That is supposed to encourage investment, by giving long-term price certainty. However, many of the details – including how the pricing structure will work – have yet to be determined.

This may mean a delay, because full details of how the reforms will work will not be in place by the end of this year, the Department of 
De Rivaz also said the proposed new reactor would need planning permission and consent for the design of the reactors.

He said: "We take our own multibillion-pound final investment decision for our new nuclear project at the end of this year. Ahead of then, we have three clear, concrete priorities for this bill. Firstly, it must move to a 'tangible counterparty' contractual model, which is clearly understood and precedented. Secondly, it must ensure that an early contract for difference, which will be delivered through transitional arrangements, is legally robust for the long-term. And thirdly, we must work to ensure the government keeps to its original timetable of spring next year for royal assent."

The planned reforms, laid out in the government's recent paper, have come under fire from some energy companies as a veiled subsidy for nuclear power. But De Rivaz said they were needed in order to ensure the long-term certainty over policy that would be needed to make the large investments in nuclear power worthwhile.

EDF is now in pole position to influence the government's energy policy, as it is the only remaining major player still showing a strong interest. Yeo's call came as the head of one of the UK's biggest investors in renewable energy, Scottish Power, warned that the UK was increasingly being seen as a risky place to invest in wind power, because of government meddling with established subsidy programmes. He said the problem could result in higher prices for wind projects, putting off investors and imperilling the UK's climate change targets.

Keith Anderson, chief corporate officer at Scottish Power, said: "The current delay in finalising this agreement is resulting in a number of very unhelpful rumours and speculation about last-minute political intervention potentially leading to this evidence based outcome being overridden.

"If correct, this could set an unwelcoming precedent for the UK energy sector and potentially have an adverse effect on investor confidence at a critical time for the UK energy industry. Up until now, we have prided ourselves [in] not having to factor in political risk to our UK investment decisions, but perhaps it is something we may need to consider in the future as we seek to invest billions of pounds in offshore, onshore and marine renewable energy projects. We want to help the UK achieve its carbon reduction targets, and to do this we need certainty and consistency in energy market regulation."
