Culling badgers will not get rid of bovine TB in the UK for more than two decades, the environment secretary told farmers on Wednesday.
The controversial cull is part of a package of measures championed by the coalition government, including controls on the movement of cattle and better monitoring. But these are still unlikely to bring the disease under control for many years.
Elizabeth Truss, secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, said: “This government is taking action to deal with this disease. This is not something that can be achieved overnight. Our strategy is focused on eradicating it by 2038.”
She defended the cull, telling the Oxford Farming Conference: “It is not easy, but we will do the right thing even if the protest groups don’t like it. Our comprehensive strategy involves cattle movement controls, vaccination in the edge areas and culling where the disease is rife. We know from the experience in Australia where the disease has been eradicated, and in Ireland and New Zealand where it is being dramatically reduced, that this approach works.”
Truss also promised dairy farmers, the main victims of the bovine TB outbreaks, that the government would target more support at the dairy industry, including longer contracts with buyers, new capital investment for monitoring animal welfare and improving the energy efficiency of cattle housing.
Dairy farmers have been hard hit by falling prices, encouraged by large supermarkets, from about 33.8p per litre a year ago to prices in the low 20s today.
Tighter regulations on labelling may also be on the cards, if Truss wins her arguments in Brussels. Currently, dairy and meat products that are produced elsewhere in the EU can be labelled as British if they are processed or repackaged here, a long-standing grievance for many farmers. Truss said: “It is wrong that when you go into a British supermarket you can look at a product on the shelves and think it’s British when in fact the milk in it has been produced abroad.”
Truss also promised new rules on the government’s procurement of food. By 2017, “all food that can be bought locally will be bought locally”. With a sideswipe at Ed Miliband’s adventures with a bacon sandwich last year, she added: “I am pleased that the work of Defra’s staff is already being fuelled by British rather than Danish bacon.”
