As spring bulbs burst into life in gardens around the UK, and plants break into a late second bloom, this autumn has seen balmy temperatures prevail across the UK and many parts of Europe.
Despite these unusual scenes, however, this year overall is not likely to be a global record-breaker. Figures from the The UK has hardly been alone - weather in Russia since January has been several degrees above normal, and central America has also seen a warmer spell. But La Niña - a weather system in the Pacific that brings cooler water to the surface - pushed down the global average, meaning this year was cooler than 2010, which broke weather records around the world.
Today's data confirms the overall warming trend, however: of the 10 warmest years on records, nine occurred since 2000. Each successive decade since 1950 has been warmer than the last.
The data is published as governments around the world meet for the second day of the fortnight-long United Nations climate change talks in Durban, where they are expected to haggle over issues such as finance flows from rich to developing nations, to help the latter cut greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change.
Peter Stott, head of climate monitoring and attribution at the Met Office, said: "This year we have seen a very persistent and strong La Niña. This has a global impact on weather and temperatures, and is one of the key reasons why this year does not figure as highly as 2010 in the rankings. However, global temperature so far this year is higher than during the La Niña events in 2008 and 1999-2000, indicating a continuing warming trend combined with natural variability."
The Met Office calculates that the global average temperature for January to October 2011 was 14.36C, 0.36C above the 1961-1990 long-term average. Full data for the year will be available next March.
According to Nasa, last year was the warmest on record, but there is a slight variation in the datasets collated by different national climate science centres, and according to the data used by the Met Office and its partners at the University of East Anglia, last year's average global temperature was very slightly lower than those recorded in 1998.
Phil Jones, director of the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, said that due to natural variability, he did not expect to see each year warmer than the last, but the long-term trend was clear. "The HadCRUT3 record [compiled by the Met Office and UEA], supported by the other records, is one indicator among several which provide overwhelming evidence that the climate has warmed," he said. "Independent researchers analysing long term trends of these indicators, have seen an increase in air, sea and land temperatures, rising sea-levels, and decreasing Arctic sea-ice, spring snow cover in the northern hemisphere and glacier extent."
