Cities around the globe should have more say over their energy policy and powers to deal with climate change, the Mayor of Rio de Janeiro has told the Guardian.
Speaking on the fringes of Climate Week in New York, Eduardo Paes said: “They should have more autonomy, it would make a difference.” Most cities are subject to regulations and policy set at the national level, which can fail to take account of their individual needs and characteristics, he said.
“National governments make decisions but do not consider what cities are doing [on energy and climate] and therefore do not properly support cities,” he argued. That can also result in a lack of financing for cities to be able to make vital changes, such as improving energy efficiency and public transport, he said.
In many countries, mayors of large cities have extensive powers, including over policing, transport, building and large aspects of health and education. But energy policy is usually dictated by national governments, with cities having little say in how their residents and businesses are powered.
Paes, who hosted the 2012 environmental conference Rio+20 and is chair of the C40 group of cities which have pledged to cut greenhouse gas emissions and tackle climate change, added: “Cities need to work with national governments and regional governments on this. Cities have the capability to cut global emissions by 3 gigatonnes, our research has found - this is a big opportunity.”
As part of Climate Week, which kicked off on Sunday with a 300,000-strong march through New York and similar marches around the world, the C40 group presented its annual prizes to cities that have come up with innovative ways to improve the environment.
Among the ten awards were two for London, on air quality and carbon accounting. The former was criticised by green campaigners as the UK’s capital has a record of breaching EU air quality standards. Other winners included China’s Shenzen, for urban transportation, and Seoul for green energy, Amsterdam for finance and economic development, and Barcelona for intelligent city infrastructure.
Paes said the examples of cities performing well should inspire others. “I am confident that their knowledge and experience will help drive other cities to implement on-the-ground solutions faster and more efficiently. Through cooperation and collaboration, cities continue to deliver the results that are having a global impact.”
More than half of the world’s population live in cities, and they produce the majority of greenhouse gas emissions. 
City residents are also among those likely to face the perils of climate change, including rising sea levels - many major cities, from London and New York to Shanghai, Sydney and Rio de Janeiro are built by the sea - and the threat of major rainfall and extreme weather. Often, city infrastructure - including power networks, sewage and drainage systems, telecommunications and transport - has been built to old specifications that may not reflect the stresses they could be put under if global warming proceeds rapidly.
The vulnerability of even modern, rich and industrialised cities to extreme weather was illustrated when Hurricane Sandy hit New York in 2012, overwhelming much of the infrastructure in the areas worst affected.
