"This guy is so far out on the environmental extreme, we'll be up to our neck in owls and outta work for every American." That was George HW Bush, then US president running for re-election, attacking Al Gore, vice-presidential candidate, in 1992, as quoted later in Gore's Oscar-winning film An Inconvenient Truth.
The exact correlation between the number of owls and US jobs was never expounded, but what was made clear was that green issues were increasingly a dividing line in culture war at the heart of US politics. With David Cameron's reshuffle of his ministerial posts, fears are growing among moderate politicians in Westminster that a similar attempt to draw a line between left and right on environmental issues is taking place here.
"That is what Lynton Crosby would like to see," one senior Tory told the Guardian, referring to the prime minister's electoral adviser from Australia, where green politics are if anything even more polarised than in the US. "But whether the higher-ups in the party will agree is another matter."
The question is crucial for the future of climate change and environmental policy. Since the premiership of Margaret Thatcher – a chemist by training who spoke out on the need to tackle climate change in 1988 – green issues have largely enjoyed a cross-party consensus in the UK, in contrast to the US. But the current coalition has been heavily criticised by green groups who say it has failed to fulfil Cameron's promise to be the "greenest government ever".
That impression was reinforced by the departure of Greg Barker, the last remaining prominent green Tory in government, from the role of minister of state for energy and climate change. In opposition he was instrumental in promoting Cameron as a green politician, accompanying him on tireless rounds of visits to green groups and helping to orchestrate the "hug a huskie" trip to Greenland.
His departure is the latest in a line of blows to green Toryism, abetted by the chancellor's outspoken remarks branding green regulations a burden on British businesses that he would like to see cut. "There is a strong streak of climate scepticism among the newer MPs," one Conservative politician said, backed up by several others.
Several prominent green Tories have been forced out of their jobs in recent months. This year Tim Yeo, former Conservative minister and a scourge of government climate policies, was deselected by his constituency party. So too was Anne McIntosh, chair of the committee on environment and rural affairs. Laura Sandys, another thoughtful green voice, stepped down, to the dismay of campaigners.
Green businesses are increasingly worried. Paul King, chief executive of the Green Building Council, said: "It's deeply worrying. We've seen [green Tories] falling, and the new MPs are not showing much willingness on these issues. But the public are not anti-green."
But there have been counter-signs, too. The climate sceptic Owen Paterson was ousted as environment secretary, to the delight of green campaigners. His replacement, Liz Truss, won plaudits in her former role in education but has said little publicly on the environment to date. Neither have the two new junior appointments to the Department of Energy and Climate Change, Matt Hancock and Amber Rudd. "We just don't know what they stand for," said one Whitehall insider, a complaint repeated several times to the Guardian.
Moderate politicians and observers think the coalition will continue to find the centre ground. "Environmental issues are part of the centre ground of British politics," said Guy Shrubsole, of Friends of the Earth. "That has been so in the UK since Margaret Thatcher. We are not like the US or Australia – this is a different situation."
The news from the US may discourage those who want to make this a dividing line. "Climate change denial by America's Republicans has undermined the best policy outcomes for a generation, making the fight against climate less effective, more expensive, and unnecessarily rancorous," said Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House climate change aide. "But recent polling shows the issue is becoming a political embarrassment and millstone for the Republican party, even as they have yet to change their stripes. It's hard to see why any party around the world would emulate such nihilism."
"They will have a fight on their hands," warned Shrubsole of those who want to change UK politics against environmental action. Green organisations – who, if conservation groups such as the National Trust are included, boast a combined membership of millions, far outstripping any political party – are gearing up for that fight. "People in this country do care about nature," said Gareth Morgan, of the RSPB. "It's up to us NGOs to show politicians that. It is not a trade-off between protecting nature or the economy – we can have both together."
